Art By Ryan Yee

Introduction

This is a fan-made adventure module using the D&D 5e
system. All resources for running this adventure can be
found here. All illustrations and names used from Magic:
The Gathering, along with all D&D terms and rules, are
properties of Wizards of the Coast. This is only a fan
creation, not in any way made for sale.
Download the basic rules for FREE at here!
Innistrad is a setting steeped in gothic horror themes
and makes liberal use of horror tropes. Werewolves hunt
within the forests, vengeful spirits haunt the places of
their grisly deaths, hedonistic vampires feast on humans
at their leisure, and Frankenstein-like mad scientists
create abominations stitched together from corpses. All
these classic horror stories are merged together to create
a unified campaign setting that is much more than the
sum of its parts, an amazing and compelling backdrop for
epic storytelling.

The first part of the series, Introduction, can work as a
handout to give to players whose characters are native
to Innistrad, as it contains mostly general knowledge –
though you may omit bits of information at your discretion.
Players may have access to additional information based
on which of the four provinces their characters hail from
(if any). If a character lives in Kessig, you may want to
give that player access to some of the information in A
Planeswalker’s Guide to Innistrad: Kessig as well, but
double check to see if there’s any information you as the
DM would rather withhold. You’ll likely want to omit the
section about werewolves, as such information probably
isn’t known by average folk, and even some parts may be
a mystery to werewolves themselves.
Characters that aren’t locals may also discover
information about places and people with appropriate
Intelligence checks, such as Intelligence (Religion) to recall
lore about the Church of Avacyn, or Intelligence (Nature)
to recall lore about the basic geography of Stensia.

Learning About Innistrad

The vast majority of Innistrad’s backstory can be found
in the A Planeswalker’s Guide to Innistrad series on
Wizards’ official site. The entire series does a great job
summarizing everything you, the DM, need to know about
the setting. Read it over once and then have it open for
reference when running a game and you’ll be set.

1
Introduction

Art by Steve Prescott

•

•

•

•

•

Adapting Innistrad to D&D

Innistrad is very compatible as a D&D setting. Almost
everything in the setting functions well under the D&D
system.

Classes

The classes present in the Player’s Handbook not only
fit seamlessly into the setting, nearly all of them are
explicitly mentioned in the official lore:
• Paladins and Clerics would be exemplary soldiers and
leaders within the Church of Avacyn, blessed with the
capability to wield the Light and spread the Church’s
influence to the most dangerous corners of the world.
They would most likely start their careers in Thraben,
the seat of the Church.
• Rangers and Druids are both tied to the forests that
cover most of Innistrad. Rangers are often hunters
and wilderness guides, while Druids act as curators
of the forests and mediators of ancient forest spirits.
Both tap into the ancient, primal powers of nature
that have been forgotten by most folk since the rise of
the Avacyn Church.
• Bards and Rogues are drawn to more densely
populated cities, such as the ones found in the

2
Introduction

•

province Nephalia, to earn coin from their respective
trades. Bards travel from town to town as entertainers
while Rogues often use their talents in criminal
activities.
Wizards pursue academic interests and are often wellrespected scholars, astronomers, and alchemists. In
the pursuit of knowledge, some require isolation in
a quiet village or off somewhere on their own, while
others seek colleagues in Nephalia’s larger towns to
combine research
Barbarians often come from the province Kessig, a
reflection of the untamed spirit of the land and its
people. Some scholars point out similarities between
a barbarian’s rage and the ferocity of werewolves.
Fighters come from all walks of life. These disciplined
martial masters are often hired muscle for a wide
variety of tasks, or do the work of the Avacyn Church
as cathars, the militia of the Church.
Sorcerers seem to manifest their powers out of
nowhere, though there are rumors of the magic
coming from their blood, or being permanently
changed after exposure to raw magic.
Warlocks can be anyone willing to make the taboo pact
for power: Skirsdag cultists gladly enter them with the
fiends they worship, those in touch with nature make
pacts with the powerful fey spirits living in the forests,
and most rare are the mad few that acquire a dark
patron from beyond Innistrad itself. Warlocks must
keep their pacts a secret or else face persecution,
especially from the Church of Avacyn.
Monks are a little tougher to fit, but it wouldn’t be a
huge stretch to say that perhaps most are trained as
cathars for the Avacyn Church or are brought up in
remote villages.

Races

One issue that you must decide upon is what races to
allow from the Player’s Handbook as natives of Innistrad.
The official lore seems to indicate that elves have gone
extinct long ago, and that other fantasy staple races like
dwarves and halflings do not exist in this world.
There are a few ways to interpret the absence of nonhuman races. The most straightforward option would be
to only allow human characters as natives of Innistrad. If
you choose this option, it’s strongly recommended that
you let the players use the Player’s Guide to Innistrad:
Human Variants by redditor /u/Nihilates; the guide
allows for mechanical variety within the human race and
serves as a wonderful primer for players to learn about the
province that their character hails from.
Another option would be to treat non-human natives
as exceptionally rare: elves live in small communities deep

within forests, using cunning magics to keep themselves
isolated from the outside world. Tieflings could be the
result of sadistic experiments carried out by the demonworshipping Skirsdag cultists – in fact, there is at least
one official human/devil hybrid in the lore already: the
planeswalker Tibalt. With a little bit of creativity you can
fit any PHB race into Innistrad, but any non-human would
certainly be a shock to the human locals they come across.

Religions

Another possible issue is what religions to allow. The
majority of Innistrad’s citizens worship the angel Avacyn,
while minor sects pray to demons, and others give
homage to woodland spirits. Do the natives of Innistrad
have knowledge of other gods such as Bahamut and
Pelor? Again, it’s up to you, the DM, to figure out what to
allow in your version of Innistrad. Just remember there’s
always a solution.

Innistrad in the D&D
Universe

In the universe of Magic: The Gathering, Innistrad is its
own separate plane, and the only known outsiders are
planeswalkers. If you wish to bring Innistrad into the D&D

universe, just plop it into the Material Plane as its own
world, like Forgotten Realms and Greyhawk are. Visitation
from outsiders would still be rare (much like the odd
planeswalker visit) but it would allow outsider PCs with
different races/religions to enter the land with the help of
a portal or some advanced magic.
If we go a little further with this idea, the gothic horror
doom and gloom that pervades all of Innistrad could be
the influence of the Shadowfell; perhaps that shadowy
plane has an unusually strong presence/overlap on this
world. That’s why the sun shines dimmer, the spirits of
the dead are more restless, and everything is all-around
dark and sinister compared to other worlds in the Material
Plane.

The Truth About The Moon

Let’s take things one step further. What if this strong tie to
the Shadowfell came from a specific source? A source that
is tied to many of Innistrad’s supernatural happenings,
dampening protective wards and empowering both
werewolves and vampires? Yes, Innistrad’s link to the
Shadowfell is the moon.
The Innistrad moon is a massive portal to the Shadowfell
plane. No one remembers what sinister entity constructed
this link between planes, but the world of Innistrad was
set to be consumed utterly by the Shadowfell. The deity

Art by Ryan Yee

3
Art by Ryan Yee

that saved Innistrad from being swallowed up by the
Shadowfell has similarly been lost to history.
This god could not close the immense portal, but
managed to block off and imprison the portal at the cost
of the deity’s life. The god’s corpse engulfs the portal as
a massive desert of silver. The barrier of silver stops the
Shadowfell from consuming the world, but does not block
its influence entirely. You can see an imprint of the longforgotten god on the moon to this day – it’s the heron on
the moon’s surface.
This explains the seemingly paradoxical nature of
Innistrad’s moon: the portal to the Shadowfell inside of
the moon empowers evil creatures, while the outside
surface of silver empowers good. A full moon is when the
portal to the Shadowfell is largest and is consequently
when werewolves are strongest, yet blessed silver from
the moon is the most effective at defeating them.

Running The Adventure

Army of the Damned is an adventure for four characters
of 1st level. During the course of the adventure, the
characters will advance to 5th level. You can keep track
of experience by writing down the experience gained per
event, which is provided by the module. Alternatively, you
can choose the milestone experience system and level up
when the adventure calls for it.
To properly run this adventure, you will need Monster
Manual for D&D 5e. The combat statistics of monsters
and NPCs in this adventure will be cited to the appropriate
page. For example, Jeleva is a vampire spellcaster (MM
p298), which means you will find her combat statistics in
Monster Manual page 298. New monsters will have their
statistics provided in APPENDIX B.
Similarly, magic items found over the course of this
adventure will have their page in the Dungeon Master’s
Guide cited. New items will have their statistics provided
in APPENDIX A.
The aforementioned Planeswalker’s Guide to Innistrad
should be read to get a feel for the adventure’s setting.
All other information will be provided here in the module.

Adjusting Difficulty

The combat events are tuned for four characters of the
appropriate level (starting at level 1), following the combat
difficulty guide outlined in Dungeon Master’s Guide.
If for any reason you wish to strengthen/weaken the
combat encounters, it’s highly recommended that you
use an encounter builder such as Kobold Fight Club.
These builders use the calculations outlined in Dungeon
Master’s Guide and will help you adjust the difficulty
of combat by adding/removing monsters to reach the

4
Introduction

desired difficulty.
For example, 3 zombies (MM p316) are a Hard challenge
for four level 1 PCs. If you have five level 1 PCs instead, that
same encounter becomes a Medium challenge. You can
bump the difficulty back to Hard by adding an additional
zombie to the encounter.
With your handy online encounter builder, tuning
combat difficulty to your personal playgroup is a quick
and painless process.

Adventure Background
Humanity’s Peril

The archangel Avacyn, the central figure of the Church
of Avacyn and the main conduit of holy magic on the
plane, hasn’t been seen over the last few seasons, and her
absence shows. Since Avacyn has disappeared, prayers
have not spared remote villages from werewolf attacks as
they once did. Holy symbols have not stopped vampires
from preying on travelers in the high mountain passes.
The dead are not protected from tampering by ghoulcallers
and flesh-animating alchemists called skaberen. With the
power of holy magic waning, humanity is being pushed
into a corner by an encroaching darkness that threatens
to consume them.
Only a select few elders in the Church, including
Mikaeus, the ruling Lunarch, know what has happened
to Avacyn; the archangel is trapped within the Helvault
after a desperate struggle with the demon Griselbrand. To
save Avacyn (if she is even alive) would require shattering
the Helvault and releasing hundreds of years’ worth of
captured demons imprisoned within the silver prison with
her, a risky move that may doom the plane utterly.

One Hope

Mikaeus and a handful of his most trusted advisors
hatched a desperate plan: they believe that an artifact in the
Church’s possession, a mystical tuning fork, holds the key
to retrieving Avacyn from the Helvault without releasing
the demons trapped with her. Not understanding how
to wield the artifact themselves, the elders have secretly
delivered the fork to a musical prodigy in Stensia named
Katarina Brunn, hoping her talents can unlock its power
while the Church tries to maintain order in the world.
Mikaeus knows that the secret demon-worshiping cult,
the Skirsdag, have human members embedded within
Thraben in all levels of the church, nobility, and the trades;
the Lunarch believed it would be safer if Katarina studied
the artifact in her home town of Shadowgrange, far away
from the Skirsdag’s influence. The province of Stensia has

plenty of its own dangers, however.

Voldaren’s Lesson

Katarina Brunn led the local militia of Shadowgrange,
having trained as a paladin in her youth, even joining the
ranks of the Riders of Gavony for a time. As impressive
as her martial and leadership abilities were, it was her
reputation of being a musical prodigy that made the
Acacynian Church elders decide to select her to unlock
the mysteries of the tuning fork artifact. Indeed, she was
making great progress into figuring out the artifact.
Shadowgrange is one of the bleakest places in all
of Innistrad. Aside from their own local members, the
people are isolated from the Church of Avacyn’s influence.
Shadowgrange is situated deep in the heart of Stensia,
surrounded by vampire estates that view humans as
cattle, and is mostly cut off from the outside world. The
villagers are fiercely passionate about their lifestyles and
have immense pride in their traditions. This is mostly a
coping mechanism to hide the truth – they are paranoid
and fearful of their situation. Villagers disappear with a
grim regularity, usually as a meal for vampires, and the

people have been conditioned for generations to do
nothing about it.
There were murmurs of change in the past few years,
however. Katarina and her fiancee, an alchemist named
Siegfried, led a movement to defend themselves from the
vampires and other horrors in the night. They bolstered
the town’s defenses and tried to convince the villagers
to fight. For a while, their efforts were successful – until
Avacyn disappeared, and the holy wards around the village
began to falter.
Two months ago, while Katarina was deep in her
experiments with the artifact, vampires from Voldaren
Manor entered the village. The vampires were preparing to
celebrate the disturbing three-day holiday called Court of
the Vampire Queen, and came to collect their unfortunate
“Queen” – Katarina, the troublemaker. Katarina, Ralph,
and Siegfried fought the vampires alone. The trio pleaded
and begged with the villagers to help, but their friends and
neighbors all stood by, frozen in fear. In the end, Ralph was
killed, Katarina was taken, and Siegfried was convinced by
his love to flee and keep the artifact safe.

Art By Igor Kieryluk

5

Art by Dave Kendall

Revenge of the Damned

Siegfried was devastated with what happened. He and
Katarina’s family dedicated their lives to serve and protect
the people of Shadowgrange, only to be betrayed by them.
In a fit of rage, grief, and despair, he left the village, vowing
vengeance on all of Katarina’s murderers.
The alchemist has taken up residence in the abandoned
Maurer Estate. There he pursues the darker side of
alchemy, the necro-alchemy of producing skaabs.
Siegfried has teamed up with ghoulcaller Rinelda Smit,
and together they have a mad plan to build an army of
skaabs and ghouls, taking the fight to the Voldaren estate
itself.
To build an army of undead requires many corpses.
Siegfried has a decent supply, but he’ll need more,
hundreds more to dare challenge the Voldaren family.
The skaberen has turned his eyes towards Shadowgrange:
the villagers damned so many with their cowardice. They
damned all those that disappear in the night with no
retaliation, all those that begged for help, including his

6
Introduction

beloved Katarina, who devoted her life to help them.
If the cowards refuse to fight the vampires in life, they’ll
fight them in death.

Overview

Army of the Damned is divided into four parts.
In Part 1, “Into Stensia,” the adventurers are on the
road to the village of Shadowgrange, entering the province
of Stensia through the Kruin Pass and now journeying
into the inner valley via the Hofsaddel Pass towards
Shadowgrange. During this treacherous journey, the
adventurers may come across deadly foes and potential
allies, some of these encounters laying hooks for short
adventures in part 2.
In Part 2, “Shadowgrange,” the characters arrive in
Shadowgrange to find the village in a state of unrest after
a brazen vampire attack. The adventurers must enter the
mayor’s haunted house to retrieve the Church’s holy relic.
They can also investigate the mystery of the abandoned

alchemy shop and help various locals with smaller
problems.
In Part 3, “Night of the Dead,” the characters must deal
with approaching undead threat led by ghoulcaller Rinelda.
They can lead a defence or evacuation of the village. Once
the zombies have been addressed, the adventurers can
continue on their main mission of retrieving the artifact
from Siegfried.
In Part 4, “Into the Farbog,” the characters travel
through the farbog towards Maur Estate where Siegfried
resides, wading through spirits and deadly monsters.
In Part 5, “The Perfect Storm,” the characters infiltrate
Mauer Estate, making their way past its vile defenses until
confronting Siegfried in his laboratory, where the mad
scientist is putting the finishing touches on his ultimate
creation.

Adventure Hooks

You can let players invent their own reasons for visiting
Shadowgrange, or they can use the following backgrounds
as an easy way to create characters with compelling ties to
the events of Army of the Damned.

5. The holy tomb of Saint Traft, one of the most righteous
and celebrated cathars to walk the land, is located
in Shadowgrange. You’ve decided to make a holy
pilgrimage to the saint’s tomb, where it’s said visitors
occasionally receive aid in the form of prophecy and
omens.
6. Every few nights, you have a strange sequence of
apocalyptic dreams where the holy city of Thraben is
overrun by fiends and undead. Each time, the dream
ends with you holding a strange object in your hand
and a silver monument shattering in front of you,
releasing a flood of light that cleanses the city. You
feel a strange compulsion to travel to Shadowgrange,
convinced that the object of your dreams is there.
7. You have a secret. You were once a Skirsdag cultist,
but at the end of your life you tried to change your
ways for good. With your dying breath, you prayed to
the moon for redemption. A vision came to you in the
shape of a silver heron. It told you to find an artifact
named the Strionic Resonator in Shadowgrange and
free Avacyn. You awoke in a new body, your memories
of your former life but a dim shadow. Only the vision
with the silver heron remains in your mind with perfect
clarity.

Below is a list of bonds that applies to any background
that players select or create. You can replace or augment
some or all of the options in your chosen background with
one or more of the bonds.
BOND (D8)
1. The Church of Avacyn has hired you to make contact
with Katarina Brunn, a musical prodigy living in
Shadowgrange, whom they have not heard from in
months. You must find her and/or retrieve an artifact
that was under her care.
2. A letter has arrived summoning you to Shadowgrange.
Your cousin, Siegfried Reinholdt, has fled from
his home in Shadowgrange under mysterious
circumstances, and the deed to his property has
passed to you. Whatever you choose to do with the
shop, you must travel to Shadowgrange to sign the
necessary papers.
3. You have infiltrated the ranks of the demonworshipping Skirsdag cult. The cult has found out
about a secret plan that the Church of Avacyn is carrying
out, something involving an artifact being held by a
woman named Katarina living in Shadowgrange. You
are under orders to investigate this artifact.
4. Sielda Reishaf, an elder of the Avacyn Church and your
foster parent, has entrusted you with an important
mission: travel to Shadowgrange and find Katarina
Brunn. If she is missing, then retrieve the artifact she
was holding, a so-called “tuning fork.”

7
Introduction

Map by Sean Ellison

8
Chapter 1: Into Stensia

Part 1: Into Stensia
The adventure begins with the player characters on the
road, traveling from Thraben to Shadowgrange (MAP).
The journey took them through the province Gavony into
Stensia via the Kruin Pass, a treacherous pass through the
mountain range called Geier Reach, which cuts off Stensia
from the rest of the provinces. The characters journeyed
through Stensia’s inner valley and now cross Hofsaddel
pass into the outer valley where Shadowgrange resides.
Before you begin, have your players introduce their
characters. Let them explain why their characters are
making the journey from Thraben to Shadowgrange,
either from one of the preconstructed backgrounds or
something they’ve made up on their own. When you’re
ready to begin, read or paraphrase:

Your journey from Thraben to Shadowgrange has been
relatively safe and mercifully uneventful so far. The road
drifted across the rolling hills and heaths that make up the
landscape of province Gavony, taking you through small
villages and quiet farmlands.
A few days ago you entered Geier Reach, the imposing
mountain range that cuts Stensia off from its neighboring
provinces. The trail through it, called Kruin’s Pass, was a
long, jagged path that cut up and over the mountainsides,
until finally you entered Stensia proper. The last few
days had you trek through Stensia’s inner valley, passing
through the small settlements Silbern, Bourg, and Corsiva,

until earlier today when you crossed the threshold into the
outer valley via the Hofsaddel Pass.
The journey continues through Stensia’s outland valley
along winding stone paths dotted by grim pine trees
and flanked by the far-flung mountain ranges whose
boney peaks reach into the cloudy sky. Sprouting from
one such mountain is a castle with many spires, its
imposing structure casting a long shadow down from the
stony peaks. A hazey fog looms over the valleys, lightly
obscuring objects in the distance. The sky is awash in
warm orange-red, with dark purplish-red clouds covering
the setting sun.
In this part of the adventure, the players have just entered
Stensia’s outland valley via Hofsaddel Pass. The castle
overlooking the pass is Castle Falkenrath, the home
base of the Falkenrath vampire bloodline. Common local
knowledge would know of the castle and the need to avoid
approaching it closer than necessary.
The journey to Shadowgrange will take two days.

Road Encounters

Along the way, the characters will partake in four of
the following events below. These events serve as an
introduction into the lands, setting the tone of the world,
feeding little bits of lore to the players, and establishing
that Stensia is a dangerous place to travel.
Choose four of the events, marking when they occur
(day/night). Alternatively, roll a D8 and consult the Road

9
Art by James Paick

Art by James Paick
Encounters table to determine what the party
meets, rerolling 8’s and any duplicate results. You
may choose to divide the four events into two per
day, or randomly distribute them by rolling a D4(-1)
to determine which day the event occurs.
The difficulty of combat encounters and their
subsequent XP awards assume a party of four level
1’s. If this is not the case in your game, or if you
wish to make the combat easier or harder, you
may tweak the combat encounters to your desired
difficulty with Kobold Fight Club or similar builders.
d8
1

Event
Ancient Devoutees

2
3
4
5
6

Cloud of Teeth
Explosive Summons
Fiendish Hecklers
Into Darkness
Ominous Bridge

7

Wolf in Sheep’s
Clothing

Ancient Devoutees

The adventurers come across the ruins of a small roadside
chapel, its name long forgotten.

Tucked between the road and the mountainside are the
dilapidated remnants of a small chapel. The roof had
caved in long ago, and the wood and stone foundation
are half-covered in dirt and vegetation. Shards of colored
glass from what once were stained glass windows litter
the ground near the entrance.
With Avacyn’s presence fading from the world, foul magic
has corrupted the earth here, and the dead have been
forced to rise. 3 skeletons (MM 272) (PICTURE) and 1
skeleton priest (same stats as skeletons, just reskin its
shortbow as a magical bolt of nectoric energy) – the
remains of the chapel’s priest and three cathars that died
defending it -- are damned to carry out their last holy
prayers for eternity. When the adventurers approach, the
skeletons are in the middle of this unending “service.”
If the PCs look inside, read or paraphrase:

Three figures geared in weathered leathers of cathars
sit on the rotted wooden pews with their heads bowed
in reverence. Standing in front of them, at the far end of
the chapel behind a dilapidated podium, is a skeleton
garbed in tattered priestly robes, its armed outstretched
ceremoniously.

10
Chapter 1: Into Stensia

If the skeletal priest notices the PCs, it will gesture them
to join the service and sit. If the PCs take hostile actions
or loot the chapel, all the skeletons will attack. If a PC
tries to put the skeletons to rest with any reasonable idea
(helping lead the ceremony to its conclusion, for example)
and succeed a DC 12 Intelligence (Religion) check, the
skeletons collapse and spectral images of their former
living selves briefly appear, thank the PCs and reward
them with the tithe bowl (see below) before fading away.

Treasure

A thorough search of the chapel ruins and a successful
DC 12 Wisdom (Perception) check reveals a silver tithe
collecting bowl buried in rubble beside the altar. The
bowl contains 17 cp, 14 sp, and 2 gp, while the ornate
container itself is worth 15 gp to jewelers or employees of
the Church.
While most of the skeletons’ possessions are too rusted
and decayed, one of the skeletons still grips a silver-inlaid
dagger (APPENDIX A) (PICTURE).

Awarding Experience Points

Divide 150 XP equally among the characters if the party
defeats the skeletons.

Cloud of Teeth

3 swarms of skeletal bats (APPENDIX B) are flying in
the adventurer’s direction. They roam the road with the
singular motive of ripping apart any traveler unfortunate
enough to come across them.
Characters with a passive Wisdom (Perception) 16 or

higher can sense the swarm’s approach 200 ft. away as
they round the bend. A passive Perception of 14 or higher
notices them 120 ft. away, and a 12 or higher notices them
60 ft. away. Finally, all can hear/see the swarm emerging
from the fog ahead of them 30 ft. away.

You hear a cascading sound of high-pitched chirps and
screeches coming from somewhere up ahead. It’s faint
at first, but slowly rising in volume. There’s a dark blotch
in the mists in front of you, and now you can hear the
screeching more clearly, along with the flapping of many
tiny wings. The dark blotch grows and takes form – it’s a
cloud of skeletal bats!
The swarms attack any living beings in their way
mercilessly with tiny razor-sharp bites. Each swarm moves
to a character, enters their square, and begins attacking.
They fight to the death.

Awarding Experience Points

Divide 150 XP equally among the characters if the party
defeats the skeletal bats.

Explosive Summons

A group of Skirsdag cultists have been conducting a ritual
inside a roadside cave to summon demons into the world.
The ritual reaches its explosive conclusion as the party
approaches.

The quiet valley is suddenly filled with a thunderous
booming sound that rumbles through the earth. A chorus
of otherworldly screams are heard off in the distance,
an eerie cry of pain, horror, and celebration. Moments
later, a large, dark humanoid figure emerges from the
mountainside up ahead, taking to the air with broad,
leathery wings. Black smokes streams up into the sky
from where the figure emerged.
Shilgengar, the demonlord of ashmouth (APPENDIX B)
(PICTURE), emerges from the cave where the summoning
ritual took place, 450 ft. away from the approaching
adventurers. He hasn’t seen the characters on the road
and begins flying off north to Mauer Estate. The demon
shouldn’t take notice of the characters unless the
adventurers take very foolish steps to grab his attention.
The adventurers may encounter Shilgengar again in
Chapter 4.
The cave is not far from the path the adventurers are
taking. Wisps of black sulfurous smoke streams from the
cave’s mouth. The stone surfaces inside the cave are badly
scorched from the fiery summoning. The cave is dimly lit
by numerous wax candles littering the walls and floor,
most knocked over from the explosion. Charred corpses
of several cultists are on the floor, the palms of their hands
ritually slashed open, their blood used to paint a wide red
circle on the floor. The stone floor in the middle of the
bloody circle has fallen through, now a gaping chasm that
spews heat and sulfurous black smoke. The bottom of the
chasm is lost in darkness.
When the adventurers investigate the cave or pass it
by, 2 hellriders (APPENDIX B) riding 2 ashmouth hounds
(APPENDIX B) (PICTURE) emerge from the chasm and
attack on sight. They fight to the death.

Leaping out of the chasm with a howl is a monstrous
fiery hound, its razor-sharp claws and teeth crowned
with flame. Riding atop this large dog is a small impish
humanoid with long backswept horns and hard, chitinlike dark red skin. The fiend grins wide, revealing rows
of needle-like teeth, its red eyes burning bright with

Art by Svetlin Velinov
Art by Svetlin Velinov

11
Chapter 1: Into Stensia

anticipation as it yanks the iron reigns of its steed, urging
it faster towards you.

Developments

Characters investigating the chasm find that the earth has
resealed the bottom. No more demons will emerge from
it -- at least until another summoning occurs.
A thorough search of the cultist bodies, along with a
DC 10 Wisdom (Perception) check, notices that each
cultist had been stabbed in the chest. A follow-up DC 10
Intelligence (Investigation) check notes that each cultist
was ritually stabbed in the heart with a dagger with no
signs of struggle, and a check result of 15 or higher notes
that the killing strokes were delivered hours before the
ritual completed. The ritual dagger is nowhere to be found.
While most of the cultists that participated in the
summoning ritual stuck around for its explosive
conclusion, a Wisdom (Perception) check DC 12 reveals
two pairs of humanoid footprints that left the cave only
hours ago. The footprints arrive at a horses’ prints and an
Intelligence (Nature) check DC 10 confirms that they rode
off in the direction of Shadowgrange.
These two surviving cultists are Shadowgrange
residents Otto and Magda Botler. They ritually killed the
other willing cultists to complete the summoning and left
before the ritual finished. The characters may encounter
these two in the next chapter.

The mephits keep out of the party’s attack range, defaulting
to a distance of about 100ft. from the adventurers. They
flee if attacked, only to sneak back with their Stealth +4.
They’d much rather verbally attack the adventurers than
get physical.
The elementals try to mislead the adventurers to make
them go the wrong way or doubt themselves. They could
“warn” them of a dead-end up ahead, or of a powerful
demon preying on the road, always fabrications.
The mephits constantly mock the characters at
every opportunity. They’ll insult the studious wizard’s
intelligence, call the strong barbarian weak, and complain
about the bard’s terrible music. They love getting a rise
out of characters, even if they are destroyed in the process.

Developments

If the adventurers are preoccupied fighting in a different
combat encounter and seem to be winning, one of the
mephits will sneak up to an adventurer furthest from
his or her allies (typically a ranged character) and use its
Cinder Breath before flying away, cackling. Smoke mephits
are total jerks like that.
The mephits stalk the adventurers relentlessly until all
of them are destroyed or the party reaches Shadowgrange
(maybe even longer!).

Awarding Experience Points
Treasure

If characters loot the cultist bodies, they’ll find a total of 25
cp, 18 sp, and 12 gp.
One of the cultists also carries a gilded ram’s horn. It’s
worth 25 gp to the right (shady) buyer. Etched on its side
is a symbol that characters can identify with an Intelligence
(Religion) check DC 15 -- the symbol of the archdemon
Griselbrand, the most venerated demon of the Skirsdag.

Awarding Experience Points

Divide 250 XP equally among the characters if the party
defeats the hellriders and ashmouth hounds.

Fiendish Hecklers

3 smoke mephits (MM 217) follow the characters as they
journey through the valley.

You hear snickering and cackling coming from your left,
echoing off the mountain range. A raspy, shrill voice calls
out, “you don’t want to go that way! You’ll die too soon
and spoil our fun!” Looking left, you notice three black
figures hovering in the air. The small impish creatures
billow smoke from their hazy bodies.

12
Chapter 1: Into Stensia

Divide 150 XP equally among the characters if the party
defeats the mephits.

Into Darkness

At night, 2 shadows (MM 269) begin to stalk the party.
They will try to make a Dexterity (Stealth) check to hide
in the party’s shadows, waiting until they are split up or
sleeping before attacking. The shadows are drawn to the
characters that radiate the most goodness in terms of
lifestyle, attitude, and personality. For example, they will
prioritize attacking the good-aligned paladin over the
neutral wizard.

Awarding Experience Points

Divide 200 XP equally among the characters if the party
defeats the shadows.

Ominous Bridge

The land ahead drops off into a dark, stony ravine. A
dilapidated bridge offers the most obvious way over.
Aside for the chunks of missing stone and its ruinous
appearance, the bridge is sturdy enough. That is not the
true danger, however. A giant spider (MM 328) and giant

wolf spider (MM 330) (PICTURE) lay in wait on the bridge’s
underbelly. Thin strands of nearly invisible webbing
coating the bridge alerts the spiders to any movement on
top. The spiders instinctively attack anything that disturbs
their webs, but flee if taken below half their health points.
A Wisdom (Perception) check DC 15 notices the thin
webbing on the bridge. An Intelligence (Nature) check DC
10 confirms the webbing to belong to giant spiders. Taking
a peek under the bridge (hopefully not too close!) can
spot the spiders lurking in the shadows with a Wisdom
(Perception) check DC 20.
Webs. Thin webs cover the surface of the bridge. The
squares are difficult terrain, and a creature trying to
move through them must succeed on a DC 10 Strength
(Athletics) check. On a failure, the creature is restrained in
the webs. A snared creature can take an action each round
to attempt to break free with a DC 12 Strength check, or
it can try to cut its way free by using a light weapon that
deals slashing damage. The webs have AC 10, 5 hit points,
vulnerability to fire damage, and immunity to bludgeoning,
poison, and psychic damage.

Developments

Characters can choose to avoid the bridge and spiders
entirely and navigate down into the ravine and back up
the other side, adding several hours to their journey. It
takes a Strength (Athletics) check DC 10 to climb up or
down the ravine walls.

Treasure

Three web cocoons are stuck on the bridge’s underside.
Adventurers looking under the bridge can notice the
cocoons tucked into shallow pits with a Wisdom
(Perception) check DC 20. Reaching the cocoons is
another challenge altogether. If they come up with a way
to do so and loot the dessicated corpses, they’ll find 30 cp,
27 sp, and 8 gp in coins, emerald-encrusted earings and
a gold necklace with a tear-shaped ruby together worth 30
gp total, and a potion of healing.

Awarding Experience Points

Divide 250 XP equally among the characters if the party
defeats the giant spiders or goes around them.

Wolf in Sheep’s Clothing

The party arrives at a roadside shrine. Before, these
shrines provided travellers a safe haven, its protective
magics warding the immediate area from evil creatures.
But with the archangel Avacyn’s disappearance, the holy
magic of the shrine has gone dormant.

The jagged stone road curves around a stony peak. As you
round the bend, you see an alcove in the mountainside.
In the middle of the alcove, bursting through the rocky
ground, is a wide pine tree stump. Carved from what used
to be its trunk and rising up from its stump is the symbol
of the Church: Avacyn’s Collar. Wild flowers, wooden
trinkets, and prayer beads adorn the shrine.
Kneeling in prayer in front of the shrine is a pale sweaty
human wearing dirty, torn shepherd’s clothing.
The praying man is Anton Wepper (PICTURE), a shepherd
from the village Lammas. Anton carries a dark secret: a
few nights ago he was bitten by a werewolf and cursed
with lycanthropy (MM 206). Fearing for the safety of his
loved ones, he left his home and is making the trek to
Shadowgrange, hoping to pick up supplies there and then
continue on to the farbog to live in isolation. Anton has
been praying ceaselessly to Avacyn hoping not to let the
curse take hold, but unknown to him, tomorrow night is a
full moon, which will cause him to involuntarily transform
into a werewolf.
Anton is initially fearful of the PCs but can be calmed
down if they prove they aren’t vampires or other monsters.
If Anton finds out that they’re going to Shadowgrange, he
begs to come along, as the road is dangerous. He tells
them that he’s stopping by Shadowgrange to start a new
life, which is vague but true. If pressed about his motives,
he lies, saying that he inherited land near Shadowgrange
and he is traveling to sign papers. He’s also willing
to provide any local knowledge about Stensia, basic
information about important locations, rumors, dangers
on the road, and other bits of local knowledge.
A Wisdom (Insight) check DC 13 can notice that the
nervous shepherd is withholding information. A Wisdom
(Perception) check DC 15 notices a burn mark in the shape
of Avacyn’s Collar on his wrist (Anton hides it under his
sleeve). An Intelligence (Religion) check DC 13 confirms
that the signs point to lycanthropy. An Intelligence
(Nature) check DC 13 confirms the next full moon for
tomorrow night. Getting Anton to speak truly about his
curse can be done through diplomacy, intimidation, and
other methods.

Developments

The shrine’s divine magic lays dormant. A character can
spend an hour performing the proper holy rituals with
an Intelligence (Religion) check DC 15 to reactivate the
divine magic. Doing so grants anyone resting at the shrine
an Inspiration Point, and evil creatures are compelled not
to approach the shrine’s immediate vicinity.
Anton is a good man but afraid to die. If the party figures
out his curse, he begs them to help, swearing that he is
faithful to Avacyn and doesn’t want to hurt anyone. He

13
Chapter 1: Into Stensia

needs them to escort him to Shadowgrange where he can
pick up supplies and escape north into the swamps, away
from human civilization.
If he feels his life is threatened, Anton will make a
desperate attempt to defend himself. He is a commoner
(MM 345) with a light crossbow.
The next night, when the full moon rises, he transforms
into a werewolf (MM 211), losing all self-control and goes
on a murderous rampage.

Treasure

Anton carries a small sack of coins holding 15 cp, 4 sp, and
1 gp. In the shepherd’s coat pocket is his most treasured
possession, an avacyn collar (APPENDIX A) (L). Anton
can no longer wear it as blessed silver burns his flesh. If
the characters agree to let him travel with them, he gives
them the chain as thanks before parting ways.

Conclusion of Part 1

On the end of the third day of travel, the party arrives at
Shadowgrange, where the adventure continues in part 2.

Awarding Experience Points

Reaching the village of Shadowgrange completes a story
milestone. Divide 300 XP equally among the characters.
This should provide enough XP for the characters to attain
2nd level.

Milestone: Level 2!

If you are using Milestone Experience, then the characters
attain 2nd level once they reach Shadowgrange.

Awarding Experience Points

Divide 300 XP equally among the characters once they’ve
dealt with Anton any way they choose. In the event that
they defeat him once he’s transformed into a werewolf,
instead divide 600 XP.

14
Art by Vincent Proce

Art by James Paick
a drink. Beyond the drawbridge over the water stands an
iron-reinforced wooden gate flanked by two guards, the
only way through Shadowgrange’s stone walls. A small
grove of hawthorn trees grows near the moat and more
branches can be seen poking over the village walls.

Part 2: Shadowgrange
Shadowgrange (MAP) is one of the oldest human
settlements in Stensia. Most of the villagers are farmers,
the majority being shepherds. The rest of the villagers
work in trades that support the farmers by spinning wool,
weaving clothes, shoeing horses, milling grain, and the
like. Some merchants move goods from Shadowgrange to
other settlements such as Lammas, but shipments move
less frequently these days as the roads become more
dangerous.
In the last two years, Shadowgrange has experienced
a swell of new citizens that sought refuge behind the
village’s fortifications. Most of these folk come from
smaller remote villages that have been destroyed by
over-indulgent vampires, mindless undead, or sadistic
ghoulcallers. With Avacyn’s presence missing from the
land, the protective holy wards of these villages are failing,
and creatures of the night are making bolder attacks.
Shadowgrange’s moat and stone walls make it one of
the best defended villages in the area, but many villagers
secretly believe that this settlement will eventually fall just
like the rest.
When characters first arrive in Shadowgrange, read or
paraphrase:

The valley dips downward and you see dozens of sheep
flocks roaming the thin, wispy hills, with shepherds
watching over them. Beyond, nestled in a corner beside
the jagged mountain range, is Shadowgrange. The dirt
path swings around farms and wooden cottages until it
reaches the village’s moat, where sheep gather round for

2 guards (MM 347), twin brothers Lars and Sven, stand
watch outside of the village gates. These cathars hail the
adventurers as they approach over the drawbridge. In a
cold formal tone, they check to see if the characters are
fiends by asking them to give them the palm of their hand,
which they touch with an avacyn collar made of blessed
silver (APPENDIX A).
Once satisfied that the characters aren’t supernatural
abominations, the guards, Lars animates dramatically,
tossing aside his formal speech and tries to chum it up
with the newcomers, much to the bemoaning of Sven,
who deems this “unprofessional.” Lars is a lighthearted
and curious fellow, rarely seeing strangers in the area,
and the adventurers intrigue him. The twins are willing to
provide local knowledge to the characters and point them
in the direction of wherever they need to go.

Encounters in
Shadowgrange

The party will probably want to freshen up after their
long journey to Shadowgrange. They can rest at the inn,
restock their supplies at the general shop, acquire new
weapons at the blacksmith, and receive divine blessings
at the village church. The party’s goals will then lead them
to one or more of the following locations:
Haunted House. All adventure hooks involving Katarina
Brunn or the holy relic lead to the haunted house of the
former mayor. Villagers questioned about these things
direct the PCs to Priestess Flora at the chapel where they
can get more information.
Alchemist’s Shop. Siegfried’s alchemy shop has been
abandoned ever since he left Shadowgrange. The villagers
are concerned about Siegfried’s disappearance, and that
the hawthorn tree growing in the center of the shop is
mysteriously dying. Any inquiries about the shop are
directed to Captain Levi at the visgaud grounds.
Saint Traft’s Memorial. Inside Shadowgrange’s chapel
is a statue commemorating the local saint, Traft. One of
the greatest cathars to have ever lived, it’s said that his
spirit occasionally bestows blessings on worthy visitors.
Characters making pilgrimage to Traft’s memorial will be
pointed here.

15
Chapter 2: Shadowgrange

Important NPCs

Here is a quick summary of the most important NPCs in
Shadowgrange, and their relevance to the adventure.
Eckhardt Sheck
Magda Botler
Flora Mayweather
Marcus Ritter
Silvia Wintsch
Captain Levi

Innkeeper
Owns a trading post; secretly a
Skirsdag cultist; has a cursed item
for the party
Head priestess of Shadowgrange’s
chapel; has a quest for the party
Blacksmith; has a quest for the party
Fletcher; has a quest for the party
Captain of the local militia; has a
quest for the party

Roleplaying Shadowgrange NPCs

The humans of Shadowgrange are stoic folk, neither
expressive nor demonstrative people. Countless
generations of hardship and proximity to the vampire
strongholds – lost children, lost neighbors – have taught
them to guard their hearts. They are proud and fervent in
their beliefs but seem brusque or even cold to outsiders.
Times have been particularly rough these past few
seasons with the disappearance of Avacyn. The holy wards
protecting humanity are losing power, and the villagers
are becoming more paranoid and fearful as attacks from
creatures of the night become bolder and more frequent.
Shadowgrange is becoming more crowded as they take
in refugees from neighboring villages that have fallen to
darkness, and the stress of accommodating more people
to protect and mouths to feed is worsening their tempers.
Spirits are at an all-time low with the murder of the
mayor four months ago. The villagers stood frozen in fear
as Voldaren vampires strolled into their village, murdered
their mayor, and kidnapped Katarina (See “Background”).
That event really drove home the knowledge that the
people of Shadowgrange are truly helpless in the face of
the horrors around them. Fear and shame have kept them
from even clearing out the mayor’s haunted house.
People feel a little resentment towards Thraben, the seat
of the Avacynian Church. They believe the high priesthood
isn’t doing enough to protect Stensians, instead getting
wealthy off tithes and living in safety behind Thraben’s
walls while places like Shadowgrange suffer.
Martial and magical prowess is highly prized in
humanity’s fight for survival. Villagers are initially wary
of the characters but the adventurers quickly earn their
respect and admiration if they prove to be protecting
them -- clearing the haunted house, for example. Gruff
“off you go then” goodbyes turn into “Avacyn’s blessings
upon you, heroes.”

16
Chapter 2: Shadowgrange

Town Description

Most of the villagers live on their farms outside of
Shadowgrange’s walls. The tradesfolk and wealthier
citizens live inside. Each cottage is built around a
hawthorn tree, with the tree’s trunk in the center of the
common room and its branches poke above the rooftop.
This provides residents centralized access to living wood
(APPENDIX A) as a defense against vampires. Every
cottage also features a mirror on the outside of the front
door to dissuade vampires from approaching, and often
have prayers to Avacyn engraved on the door frame to
repel evil spirits.
The following section detail specific locations in town.

Silver Rose Inn

Silver Rose Inn is a popular destination in the evening for
villagers taking a break after a long day’s work. Most folk
head back home before nightfall, however, as the roads
are far more dangerous once the sun goes down.
There are eight rooms available for rent. If the characters
decide to stay here, see “Food, Drink, and Lodging” in the
Player’s Handbook for pricing (PHB 158).
The innkeeper, Eckhardt Sheck, is a former cathar
(statted as a Neutral Good thug [MM 350]). Although in
his mid 50’s with thin greying blonde hair, he is remains
an imposing figure; his thick, muscled, hairy arms look
like they could snap a regular man in two, or at least they
could if he had a right hand instead of a grasping hook
-- he lost it fighting off a swarm of ghouls, nasty business.
His permanent scowl and gruff attitude hides his kind
heart.
If asked about Katarina Brunn, the artifact from the
Avacynian Church, or Saint Traft’s memorial, Eckhardt
tells them to speak with priestess Flora at the village
church, saying that she would know more about those
things than anyone else.
Rumors. Spending a little time in the common room and
chatting up the townspeople can provide the characters
with a number of good leads to explore around the village.
NPCs present in the Silver Rose Inn and the rumors they
pass on include:
• Gerold, an old farmer: “Priestess Flora is still looking
for tough folks to try and purge the spirits in the old
mayor’s house.”
• Lena, a shepherd: “The hawthorne tree the alchemist
shop is built around looks to be dying. Someone
needs to check out what’s killing it.”
• Merle, a cathar: “I placed an order for a blessed silver
longsword months ago. Marcus, the blacksmith, says
there’s a shortage though.”
• Carsten, a priest: “Last week I prayed at Saint Traft’s
memorial in the chapel, and I swear by Avacyn’s Light,

Map by Sean Ellison

•

•

I saw his spirit!”
Martin, village idiot: “Old man Otto at Bountiful
Heron General Store keeps complaining that there’s
no one to talk to about the ‘R’ canes. Where do you
think those grow, anyway?”
Helga, innkeeper’s wife: “Silvia, the fletcher, told me
yesterday she needs a certain type of wild herb, but
she hasn’t had the time to go get it.”

These leads should point the characters toward
opportunities for adventure in and around Shadowgrange.

Bountiful Heron General Store

Bountiful Heron is the biggest trading post in
Shadowgrange. Its shelves are stocked with ordinary
goods and supplies. Characters can buy adventuring
gear here, with the exception of items worth over 25g.
(For prices, see “Adventuring Gear” in the rulebook.)

Characters in need of metal weapons or armor are pointed
to The Tempered Bull, and ranged weapons or leathers
inquiries are nudged towards Fleeting Fox Provisions (see
their respective sections).
The owners are an old married couple, Otto and Magda
Botler. They are kind to the characters, Magda often calling
them “dear” or “sweetie.” Otto sits behind the counter
fussing over old scrolls and tomes of arcane knowledge.
Magda works the counter, feebly moving over to get
anything the characters ask for with trembling hands.
Their feeble movements and kindness are a ruse, however.
A DC 25 Wisdom (Insight) check notices that their actions
aren’t entirely sincere – Magda and Otto have honed their
“kind old people” act for over a decade. If confronted
about it, the couple tries to laugh it off, saying pretending
to be feeble gets people to do things for them.
Otto and Magda are secretly two Skirsdag cultists. Magda
is a cult fanatic (MM 345) and Otto a mage (MM 347). The
two came to Shadowgrange to steal Elbrus, the Binding

17
Chapter 2: Shadowgrange

Blade (APPENDIX A) from Saint Traft’s Memorial. Now
with the dagger in their possession, they work tirelessly
to release the demon lord Withengar from the dagger.
They recently made a trek outside of Shadowgrange to
help perform a demon summoning ritual alongside fellow
cultists (see “Explosive Summoning” in Chapter 1).
Arcane Appreciation. Otto takes special note of any
character clearly showing arcane talents – casting an
arcane spell, carrying an arcane spellbook, etc. Few folks
around here have knowledge of the arcane, and Otto
excitedly peppers the character(s) with questions about
their background, studies, and goals in their pursuit of
arcane knowledge. If the character is proficient with
Intelligence (Arcane), allow him or her to roll an Arcane
check during their talk with Otto, provided they are willing
to answer his questions. On a result of 10 or higher, Otto
gifts them a scroll of comprehend languages, saying
that he hasn’t had a use for it and hopes it may help the
budding spellcaster; on a 15 or higher he is so impressed
with the character’s knowledge that he also gifts them a
scroll of burning hands and a scroll disguise self.
An Innocent Gift. Otto and Magda know that Elbrus, the
Binding Blade requires many souls to awaken Withengar. It
would be very difficult to kill enough people to unleash the
demon lord without blowing their cover. The adventurers
arriving in town presents a unique opportunity to pass the
blade off to professional killers that will surely fulfill the
dagger’s soul quota and unleash Withengar for them.
Otto will take any good opportunity to put Elbrus in the
party’s hands, either by initially offering to sell them it for
50 gp, or later by gifting the characters it after they aid
the village in some significant way, such clearing out the
mayor’s house or helping the people during the zombie
attack.
Elbrus takes the innocent looking form of the
Shapeshifter’s Blade (PICTURE). Otto describes it as a
weapon that changes form based on the user’s thoughts
(which is true), and that he picked it up along his travels
but never had a use for physical weapons (also true).

Awarding Experience Points

Divide 200 XP equally among the characters if a party
member talks arcane magics with lonely old Otto.

The Tempered Bull

Physical danger is a fact of life for Stensians, and most
villagers have weapons ready to protect themselves from
the creatures of darkness. Shadowgrange’s forge runs hot
from the crack of dawn until late into the night, smithing
new weapons and repairing damaged ones.
Marcus Ritter, the head blacksmith, is busy tempering
a blade, assisted by six apprentices. The black-haired,

18
Chapter 2: Shadowgrange

silver-eyed man is remarkably young for his position. An
exceptional smith, his apprenticeship was cut short when
the previous blacksmith was found burnt to a crisp; rumor
has it that he cremated his late wife and she returned to
take vengeance upon him as a fiery geist. Marcus was
given the position shortly after.
Characters can buy metal arms and armor here. (For
prices, see “Equipment” in the rulebook.)
Quest: Blessed Silver Shortage. Marcus used to create
weapons of blessed silver (see APPENDIX A) with the help
of the late mayor, Ralph Brunn. With his death months
ago, however, no one else in the village knows the holy
ritual to bless the silver as the weapons are being forged.
Marcus has asked for help from Thraben but has received
no response. Without new blessed silver weapons, the
village is ill-prepared to defend themselves against
supernatural horrors. The blacksmith asks if any of the
characters know how to perform the ritual.
A character that has proficiency in Intelligence (Religion)
can attempt a DC 15 check to see if they can perfectly recall
the holy ritual. If they do, the character can assist Marcus
in creating a batch of blessed weapons, which takes 10
hours uninterrupted.
If they are successful, Marcus gifts the character one
of the weapons as thanks. The character can choose any
metal weapon (see “Weapons” in the rulebook) as their
gifted blessed silver weapon.
Characters can purchase additional blessed silver
weapons for the standard price of silver weapons (weapon
price + 100 gp for silver). Marcus is thankful for their help,
but the blacksmith cannot give his weapon stock away for
free, since this is the livelihood of him and his apprentices.

Awarding Experience Points

Divide 200 XP equally among the characters if a party
member helps Marcus craft blessed silver weapons.

Fleeting Fox Provisions

Three sisters, a fletcher named Silvia, a bowyer named
Emma, and a leatherworker named Sybille, are co-owners
of this shop. They keep the village’s hunters armed and
protected to venture into the dangerous wilderness.
Not only do they run the shop, but these sisters are also
the most talented hunters in the village. The silver-haired
women move with an uncanny grace, and despite their
advanced age (all in their 50’s), they retain the youthful
appearance of women half their age. For these reasons, the
trio have earned the nickname “Moontouched Sisters.”
Characters can buy ranged weapons, ammo, and
leather armors here. (For prices, see “Equipment” in the
rulebook.)
Quest: Find the Lotus. Silvia asks that if the party finds

themselves in the farbog to the north, to keep an eye out
for a plant called Sanguine Lotus. She has a recipe that
uses the plant’s flower to create a healing salve called
life’s blood (see APPENDIX A). The lotus only flowers for
a few weeks this time of year, and she doesn’t have the
time to venture out and collect them herself. She will pay
gold for them, along with some of the salve.
Characters proficient in Intelligence (Nature) will be
prompted to make a DC 12 Wisdom (Perception) check
while traveling through the farbog in Chapter 4. On
success, they’ll find sanguine lotus. If they characters
bring the lotus back to Silvia, she will grind the flowers
into life’s blood, giving the party two vials of it along with
50 gp.

Awarding Experience Points

Divide 200 XP equally among the characters if the party
retrieves sanguine lotus for Silvia.

Visgaud Grounds

The sturdiest building in Shadowgrange is this old stone
house built near the village gates. Visgaud Grounds

serves as the town hall, courtroom jail, and Town Guard
headquarters, housing twenty of the militia that protect
the village (the rest have small cabins of their own in and
around town).
Beside the building is the cathars’ training grounds,
where off-duty militia train on target dummies or in
practice duels with wooden swords.
Captain Levi (PICTURE) (statted as a Lawful Good
thug [MM 350]) is the leader of Shadowgrange’s militia,
being promoted to that position shortly after Katarina’s
kidnapping. A middle-aged veteran fighter trained in
Elgaud Grounds in Nephalia, Levi is a strong and capable
leader charged with protecting the village as best he can.
Alchemy Shop Investigation. Levi is aware that some
townsfolk are concerned about the mysteriously dying
hawthorn tree at the center of the abandoned alchemy
shop. He considers it a nonissue and doesn’t want to deal
with it, arguing his time is better spent on more pressing
issues, like training new recruits and other administration
work. If a PC asks to investigate the shop, or if they have
the deed to the shop, Levi is happy to let them check it
out.

19

Armory

A small stone tower adjacent to Visgaurd Grounds, about
30 feet tall, the armory holds arms and armor for the
town militia -- spears, light wooden shield, leather armor,
studded leather amor, and a few old longswords and
crossbows. Most of the arms have already been issued to
the members of the militia.
An ancient hawthorn tree with an unusually thick trunk
grows beside the armory. Villagers call it the Eldentree.
The cathars maintain the tree and diligently carve the
outline of stakes and spears into its trunk. In times of
need, these weapons are cut out of the Eldentree, which
function as weapons of living wood (APPENDIX A) for the
next two days.

Chapel

Shadowgrange’s chapel is the focal point of the village.
Most villagers worship here several times per week, and
many pass by the church on a daily basis for a blessing of
safety. Mandatory tithes and payments for blessings keep
the church’s coffers always full.
Priestess Flora (PICTURE), a priestess (MM 348),
oversees the day-to-day administration at the church with
the help of a few lower-ranking clergy members. She is
usually busy throughout the day, leading the morning and
evening sermons, blessing the villagers, and performing
divine rituals to reinforce Shadowgrange’s protective
wards. An old, oddly talkative woman, Flora stands out
amongst the majority of Stensians by being outwardly
warm and welcoming.
If asked about Katarina Brunn or the artifact, Flora
will take the characters aside and tell them the story of
what happened to the mayor’s daughter -- paraphrase
the information from “Background: Voldaren’s Lesson,”
leaving out information about the artifact itself. She knows
that Katarina was studying something of grave importance
for the high priests, but she doesn’t know what the artifact
is, only that it would’ve been kept somewhere in the house.
Saint Traft’s Memorial. Flora is happy to show Saint
Traft’s memorial to any inquiring character. She fondly
recalls the saint’s story; how he reached Sainthood in life,
how even angels would fight under his command, and
his heroic death single-handedly fighting cultists and the
demon-lord Withengar to protect a single innocent life.
(Saint Traft’s entire story can be read here.)

Inside this small room is Saint Traft’s memorial, dimly
lift by dozens of wax candles. In the middle of the room
is a statue of Saint Traft. He appears as a strong, valiant
middle-aged man taking a knee in prayer while steadying a
greatsword in hand. Soaring above him with outstretched
feathery wings is an angel in a silken gown, holding an

20
Chapter 2: Shadowgrange

ornate spear high above her head as if to rally those that
look up at her. A silver plaque at the base of the statue
reads, “Here lies Saint Traft, champion of Avacyn, hero of
Shadowgrange.”
On the back wall of the room is a display case made
of glass and iron, surrounded by etchings on the walls,
hymns and prayers to Avacyn. Inside the case rests a bone
dagger with black engravings along its blade. A small
plaque on the case reads, “A hero’s sacrifice: may the foul
demon Withengar suffer for an eternity in this prison.”
Saint Traft’s restless spirit manifests throughout Stensia,
protecting innocents and vanquishing fiends much as
he did in life. The powerful aura of fate hanging onto the
adventurers is likely to draw his attention.
The display case is locked; a DC 20 Dexterity (Sleight of
Hand) is required to open it. It is watched over by Flora,
who replenishes the holy wards around it and keeps a
permanent Alarm spell cast on the case to be alerted if
anyone opens it. Flora does not permit anyone to touch
the dagger, explaining that it holds the bound essence of
the demon lord Withengar and is not something to be
tampered with.
The dagger inside is Elbrus, the Binding Blade – or
at least it was, until Otto and Magda Botler stole it and
replaced it with a forgery (see “Bountiful Heron General
Store”). It’s such a convincing duplicate that Flora has
never noticed the switch. The only big giveaway is that the
duplicate is a mundane item, while the real thing radiates
magic, something a character may notice with the Detect
Magic spell or similar.
Quest: Saint Traft’s Favor. Traft’s spirit takes note of the
adventurers when they visit his shrine. The spirit senses
that these characters will play a pivotal role in restoring
balance to the land and seeks to aid them. At some point
later in the adventure of your choosing (perhaps after the
siege of Chapter 3), Traft appears to one of the characters of
your choice in their dream. The spirit chooses a character
that pays respect at the shrine, or one that is most likely
to wield a spear in battle, or that acts in a Lawful and/or
Good manner. When that character next sleeps, read or
paraphrase:

The spectral figure of a noble human approaches you in
your dream. His blue wispy form is perpetually shifting, as
if being buffeted by an unfelt breeze. The ghostly human’s
features matches exactly the statue of Saint Traft you saw
before: it must be his spirit.
“I sense the heavy mantle of fate resting on the
shoulders of you and your allies,” the spirit in an oddly
comforting tone, “you shall play a role in bringing balance
to this world. Unfortunately, my hold on the mortal world
is weak during these dark times, but I shall help you how

Art by Todd Lockwood

I can.”
A statuesque angel in a silken gown lands beside you
and hands you a silvery spear.
“This weapon shall aid you. Stay strong, traveler. We’ll
meet again.”
Traft and the angel fade back into the darkness.
When the adventurer wakes up, they find the moonsilver
spear (APPENDIX A) (PICTURE) from their dream gripped
in hand.

Quest: Haunted House. If not approached with any hooks,
Flora instead seeks out the characters herself. She has a
job for them: rid the mayor’s house of its evil presence.
Regardless of how they solve the problem, Flora rewards
them with 200 gp and, if they haven’t been awarded
possession of the alchemy shop already, she offers them
to take anything they find in there.

Alchemist’s Shop

Hanging above the front door of this small cabin is a
wooden sign with a potion painted on it. Like most of the
buildings here, a hawthorn tree pokes out of the cabin’s
roof in the center, but its barren branches and greying
bark signals that it’s dying.
This shop has been abandoned ever since its owner, the
alchemist Siegfried Reinholdt, fled from the village after
Katarina’s kidnapping (see “Background” for details).
The shelves around the shop are stocked with alchemical
reagents. Semi-precious gems, pickled animal body parts
such as newt eyes, and many plants can be found here,
though most of the once-live vegetation has withered and
died due to months of neglect. In total, there’s about 350
gp worth of alchemical materials that can be used for

crafting potions (See “Crafting” in the rulebook).
Along the counter is a smattering of devices, among
them ten empty vials and stoppers, a herbalism kit, and
alchemist’s supplies. (See “Tools” in the rulebook for
their stats.)
Hanging on the back wall is a shelf with potions. Some
of the liquids have expired, but there are four vials of acid,
three potions of healing, and two alchemist’s fire. (See
“Adventuring Gear” in the rulebook for their stats.)
There is a fireplace with various iron mixing pots
hanging over the pit. Inside one of the pots is a muddy
liquid that has little bits of scales, pink flesh, a small claw,
and hair. A DC 15 Intelligence (Nature) reveals it to be a
potion of animal friendship (DMG 187).

Developments

A DC 12 Intelligence (Investigation) check notices
some hastily concealed ashen footprints leading from
the fireplace and out the door. A DC 15 Intelligence
(Investigation) check examining the fireplace notices a
hidden lever. Pulling the lever slides a hidden door in the
fireplace, revealing a narrow spiraling staircase that leads
to the Alchemist’s Basement.

Alchemist’s Basement

The hidden stone staircase is a short flight of stairs,
revealing the alchemist shop’s basement. It’s pitch black
here; the characters will need a light source or darkvision
to see. Assuming vision, they see this:

The short flight of stairs ends just under the shop.The
withering roots of the hawthorn tree takes up the center
of the room and sprawls all across the floor. The roots are
covered in vines and dead shrubbery.
Along the walls on both your sides are strange
alchemical devices, glass bottles of various shapes and

21
Chapter 2: Shadowgrange

sizes filled with strange liquids, tubes connecting them
with each other and others burying themselves amid the
tree’s roots.
Beside the back wall is a wooden desk with piles of
papers covering its surface along with a leather-bound
book. Beside the desk is a humanoid figure laying down
on a metal platform with dozens of utensils littering its
sides.
That’s no ordinary vegetation growing amongst the roots;
it’s actually comprised of 5 twig blights and 1 vine blight
(MM 32). These plant monsters were part of Siegfried’s
experiments to create effective weapons against vampires,
as they are, in a sense, walking living wood (see APPENDIX
A).
The blights lay motionless on the ground, making them
indistinguishible from normal vegetation. They patiently
wait until the characters are distracted searching the
room (or they’re discovered) and then attack. The plants
are hungry, having already devoured most of the nutrients
from the hawthorn tree while locked down here, and fight
until destroyed.

Developments

A leather-bound book rests on the desk; Siegfried’s journal.
The entries describe his love of his Stensian countrymen,
praising their bravery and perserverence. and above
all, his love of Katarina, the light of his life. He outlines
dozens of plans to protect his people from the horrors of
the night, especially from the horrible vampires that prey
on humanity like cattle. Siegfried devoted his life to this
endeavor, discarding what didn’t work and always trying
out new ideas. The final entries note Siegfried’s increasingly
desperate situation now that Avacyn disappeared and her
protective magics fail; the horrors grow bolder and more
of his people die. He ultimately resolves to pursue the foul
“art” of necro-alchemy, believing it to be a necessary evil
to protect his loved ones.
The desk is covered with a seemingly endless amount
of pages discussing necro-alchemy; the art of creating
undead abominations called “skaabs.” Standing out
amongst the notes is one opened letter (APPENDIX C).
The letter is encoded: deciphering the requires Letter
Frequency Analysis to break the code; for example,
wherever the letter “z” appears it should be replaced with
the letter “a,” replacing each letter this way reveals the
hidden message. You can run this puzzle multiple ways:
• The players figure out and translate the entire letter
themselves
• The players figure out and translate a portion of the
letter, then hand them the fully decoded version
• Let the characters make an Intelligence (Investigation)
DC 15 check to crack the code

22
Chapter 2: Shadowgrange

The letter is written by Siegfried’s cousin, a man that
goes by “Stitcher Geralf.” The cousin voices his support
of Siegfried’s decision to finally study necro-alchemy and
suggests he move his operations to a place called Mauer
Estate.
On the metal platform rests a well-preserved human
corpse -- or rather, many pieces of human corpses stitched
together. Copper plates with silver-inlaid runes scribed on
them have been woven into the creature, the rune-bonds
used to join the various anatomical features. The strange
liquid in most of the glass bottles is the vital fluid, the
“blood” of the skaab, made of lamp oil with a pinch of
angel blood. Siegfried had this test skaab properly built,
but he never uttered the incantation to awaken it.

Treasure

Sitting in a corner of the basement is an alchemy jug
(DMG 150). Siegfried used the jug to produce the oil
needed for the skaab’s vital fluid.
The various necro-alchemical equipment that Siegfried
amassed in the basement could be worth 500 gp to fellow
stitchers, but commoners and members of the Church of
Avacyn would be hostile to anyone found carrying such
items.

Awarding Experience Points

Divide 325 XP equally among the characters if the party
destroys the blights.

Mayor’s House

The mayor’s house is a one of the larger and more
comfortable homes in the village. The two-story building
is built atop a small hill not far from the chapel and has a
large hawthorn tree sticking up through its roof.
The house seems ordinary enough until you come close
and notice that the mirror placed on the wooden door
has been shattered. Holy protection prayers to Avacyn
engraved on the door frame have been scratched out with
a blade, and the door is slightly ajar. The square-framed
windows reveal nothing on the inside; the house is pitch
black.
A DC 12 Wisdom (Perception) check notices about a dozen
humanoid footprints moving to and from the entrance.
The vampires smashed the mirror and scratched out the
holy wards before entering the house.
A dark presence has gripped the house ever since the
night the vampires attacked (see “Background: Voldaren’s
Lesson”).
Magical Darkness. The insides of the house is enveloped
in a pitch-black magical darkness that functions as the
Darkness spell, except that light sources do work to an

extent, offering dim light within a radius of 15ft. – beyond
that is total darkness. If the darkness is dispelled, by
Daylight or something else, it returns 1d6 rounds later.
Spooky Stuff. In addition to the magical darkness, feel
free to add any flourishes to this haunted house as you
see fit. For example, a wall may suddenly begin to bleed,
the eyes of portraits may follow the PCs, a random PC
might hear voices or see figures for a brief moment before
they disappear. Have fun with it!

The Restless Spirit

The late mayor’s restless spirit now haunts the house as a
poltergeist (MM 279). Putting him to rest is the only way
to rid of the house’s haunting.
Ralph senses the character’s intrusion and stalks them
as they explore the house. Though he moves in complete
silence and is permanently invisible, the characters feel
his presense; the air grows cold, a chill runs up their
spine, and they feel they’re being watched.
Ralph will make his displeasure known if the party
attempts to loot or otherwise disrespect his home by
telekintetically shaking or throwing furniture.
Characters can possibly avoid the spirit’s ire by
convincing Ralph that they are trying to help. By explaining
that they’re here on behalf of the Church, or that they want
to help the people of Shadowgrange, or other compelling
arguments that they can think of, they may be able to get
Ralph’s spirit to back down and maybe even stop haunting
the house. If they make a reasonable argument, allow a
character to make a DC 15 Charisma (Persuasion) check
to get Ralph to back down.
Spooky Mirrors. While Ralph is permanently invisible
to the naked eye as a poltgergeist, his spectral reflection
still appears in the dozens of mirrors littering the walls
(PICTURE).

Ground Floor

Inside, assuming the characters have a light source:

Shards of glass and dried blood litter the entryway floor.
A hallway leads to two rooms ahead. A bloody handprint
trails along the wall out of the closest room and onto the
staircase’s handrail, which spirals up around the large
hawthorn tree growing in the center of the house and up
to the second floor.
The two rooms on the main floor are the kitchen in the back
and the common room. The kitchen has been untouched,
but the common room is (quite literally) a bloody mess.
There are clear signs of battle such as slashed furniture
and scorch marks. Blood splatters cover the walls and
ceilings. It was here the vampires clashed with Ralph and

Katarina.
Slumped beside one of the walls is the decaying corpse
of Ralph Brunn, the source of all the blood. The vampires
had some “fun” with him. The mayor’s body still wears
his mithral chain shirt (DMG 187) underneath his clothes
-- not that it helped him in the end.

Second Floor

The staircase leads up to the second floor. The hallway to
the right leads to two bedrooms: Ralph’s and Katarina’s.
To the left is the music room, where the hand-smeared
trail of blood leads to.
Ralph’s bedroom has everything you’d expect in a welloff village leader’s room. Underneath his bed is a sturdy,
unlocked wooden chest holding some emergency savings.
It contains 60 sp, 40 gp, and a silk pouch containing five
tiger eyes (10 gp each) and two moonstones (50 gp each).
Amongst the nice variety of clothing in his closet are two
pairs of priestly cloth-of-gold vestments with Avacyn’s
Collar embroidered on the front and back, each worth 25
gp.
Katarina’s bedroom is also fairly mundane. Her
wardrobe contains a set of battle-worn cathar leathers,
the uniform of holy warriors of the Church of Avacyn and
functions as studded leather (see “Armor” in the rule
book). Unlike her father, Katarina’s closet lacks an array
of regal clothing; she was more interested in fighting and
doing in practical clothing instead of playing politics in
pretty dresses.
There is an unsealed letter tucked into a book on
Katarina’s desk, which can be found with a thorough
search of the room and a DC 10 Intelligence (Investigation)
check. The letter is written by her and is addressed to
her uncle, Hanns Reinhart. In it, Katarina begs her uncle
to come to Shadowgrange at once, as she needs his
expertise on silver and the moon to unlock a puzzle of
“great importance.” Apparrently Hanns has disappeared
for years now, but Katarina is convinced that he is still
alive somewhere, and this letter is the last of many sent to
all the safe houses of his that Katarina knows of.

Music Room

The hallway opens up into a large ornate room with an
arched ceiling. Paintings line the wall, along with smashed
mirrors. In each corner of the room are instruments: a
piano with a pile of sheet music placed on it, a violin on
a stand, a harp, and a bloody flute on the floor next to a
knocked over music stand.
There are a few music instruments in this room: a piano,
a bloody flute, a harp, and a violin of banishing light (see
APPENDIX A).

23
Chapter 2: Shadowgrange

There are also three paintings: one depicts a canary
sitting in a rusted bird cage beside a locked chest, another
shows a flight of angels driving back demons emerging
from a fiery chasm, and the last one is a portrait of a regal
looking man with a handlebar mustache; Bernard Brunn,
grandfather of Ralph Brunn.
After messily murdering Ralph, a few vampires
sauntered upstairs for a little entertainment. The bloodyhanded vampire played on the flute for a bit before they
got bored and left. They also smashed the mirrors so they
didn’t have to look at their own monstrous reflections.

Music Puzzle

The following is a puzzle using sheet music (APPENDIX
C) as props. You can run the puzzle multiple ways:
If a a player can read sheet music, let them figure it out
• Bard characters can automatically read sheet music
• Characters proficient in a musical instrument can
automatically read sheet music
• Silvia, the fletcher at Fleeting Fox Provisions, is known
in town to be a talented violinist. If the characters ask
around for someone that can read sheet music, they
are pointed to her.
The piles of sheet music on the piano are mostly of
popular songs known to Innistrad natives, but a thorough
search of the room and an Intelligence (Investigation)
check DC 15 notices that two sheets of music buried in
piles of paper stand out from the rest. Both have been
hurriedly written on with ink (Katarina wrote on them right
before the impending vampire attack). One says “READ,”
the other says “PLAY.” Neither of them are songs that a
local would recognize. See APPENDIX C for copies of the
sheets.
The “PLAY” sheet has a song on it that wants to be
played. Any song will do, but the song used during this
adventure’s playtest was Pan’s Labyrinth: Lullaby. If anyone
starts playing the song, either on an instrument, singing,
or humming, characters feel a sudden compulsion to pick
up the violin of banishing light. If they do, they find out
that they can play the song even if they have no experience
with a violin before. Playing the song activates the violin’s
magical properties (see APPENDIX A) (PICTURE),
flooding the room with light as the Daylight spell, and
driving back the darkness. The Daylight spell ends as
soon as the character stops playing.
The “READ” sheet has music notes that, when you look
at the corresponding letters, spell out “AGED CAGE”.
One of the paintings on the wall is of a canary sitting in a
rusted bird cage – an aged cage. Saying, “aged cage,” out
loud opens the chest in the painting with an audible creak.
Once opened, a character can reach into the painting
(which now acts as a portal to a tiny pocket plane) and

24
Chapter 2: Shadowgrange

retrieve from the chest the Strionic Resonator. The artifact
is not whole: the tuning fork is missing one of its prongs
(tines). It was cleanly removed; Katarina gave the piece to
Siegfried for safekeeping the night the vampires attacked,
gambling that the Voldarens may find one piece, but not
both.

Developments

When Ralph’s ghost is either destroyed or appeased, the
darkness shrouding the house disappears. Priestess Flora
happily pays the party what they’re owed (see “Chapel”)
and gives them the key to the alchemist’s shop.
Word quickly spreads throughout the village of the
party’s deeds. Villagers will be much friendlier to the
characters, thankful to have strong adventurers in their
midst during these bleak times.
None of the villagers know what the artifact is, other
than pointing out that it looks like a tuning fork with a piece
missing. Flora knows that Katarina was experimenting
with something on behalf of the Church, and that the only
other people that may have known about it would be her
father, Ralph (dead), and her fiancee, Siegfried (fled).
If the characters aren’t tight-lipped about the artifact,
word about it could spread and may catch the attention
of dangerous folk (the Skirsdag or worse) that would be
more than happy to “relieve” the adventurers of their newfound item.

Awarding Experience Points

Divide 450 XP equally among the characters if the party
deals with Ralph’s spirit.
Divide 1,250 XP equally among the characters if the
party recovers the Strionic Resonator.

Conclusion of Part 2

Part 3 begins after the adventurers retrieve the Strionic
Resonator. You may choose to delay Part 3 if the
adventurers still intend to explore the town further, as this
may be their final opportunity to do so.

Milestone: Level 3!

If you are using Milestone Experience, then the characters
attain 3rd level as you move to Part 3.

Art by Peter Mohrbacher

had devoted his life to defending the village from
Part 3: Night of the Dead Siegfried
the horrors that stalk Stensia; most of all, the vampires
This chapter begins shortly after the adventurers find the
Strionic Resonator in the previous chapter. If the players
do not have any intention of locating the artifact, or they
still have other intended goals in town, you may choose to
start this chapter after the players have had sufficient time
to rest, explore Shadowgrange, and restock on supplies.

Undead Menace

Events are unfolding beyond the scope of the characters’
activities: an army of undead are currently on a murderous
rampage, laying waste to all the settlements in their way.
Shadowgrange is their ultimate target.

The Horde’s Purpose

The army is a mad project crafted by Siegfried, an alchemist
that formerly called Shadowgrange his beloved home.

that kidnapped his neighbours for leisurely meals.
Together with his like-minded fiancée, Katarina Brunn,
they tried to rally the people to fight back and strengthen
their defenses. But with Avacyn’s disappearance and the
protective wards surrounding the village failing, Siegfried
became more and more desperate for answers to save his
people.
Three years ago, Siegfried finally acquiesced to his
cousin, Geralf’s, suggestion: he began to study necroalchemy, the foul art of bestowing life into stitched together
corpses to create unholy abominations called skaabs.
The alchemist perfected his craft in secret underneath
his shop, waiting for the day that he could drive back the
vampire threat with his stitched army.
When the Voldaren vampires came, murdered the
mayor Ralph and kidnapped Katarina, something inside
Siegfried snapped. He vowed revenge not only upon
the accursed vampires that killed his beloved, but also
the cowardly villagers that stood idly as it all happened.

25
Chapter 3: Night of the Dead

The alchemist fled from his home and traveled north to
the abandoned Mauer Estate, where he’s been working
tirelessly to make his dreams of vengeance a reality.
To defeat his hated vampire foes, Siegfried needs bodies.
Lots of them. To this end, the alchemist has teamed up
with a young necromancer named Rinelda Smitt. Together,
they’ve raised a zombie horde to ravage the countryside.
Rinelda leads the horde, destroying all settlements in
her way and sending the corpses of her victims back to
Mauer Estate, where Siegfried uses them to construct
abominations to challenge the Voldaren vampires. In his
twisted mind, the alchemist believes this a fitting end for
his fellow countrymen, as their cowardly betrayal in life
will be redeemed when they serve him in death.

nothing else.
•

How many are there? It was impossible to tell when
the attack happened. One moment a fog rolled in,
the next they were everywhere. But we saw them
again across the valley as we fled. Hundreds of them,
definitely.

•

Where did they come from? When we saw them, they
already were all around us. But all the walking dead
had dried mud up to their waists. You get muddy like
that from walking through the farbog (swamp) north
of Mordov, so I reckon that’s where they came from.

•

Was it just zombies? No. It was mostly undead
villagers, but I caught a glimpse of two hulking
monstrosities lumbering about. They were twice my
height and had the strength of ten men – in fact,
judging by the number of arms sticking out of the
creatures, they very well could’ve been made of ten
men! The abominations were smashing down doors
and swatting away cathars like flies. But the worst
thing I saw was a human walking amongst these
brutes. A teenaged girl chanting and waving a symbol
around – I don’t know what it was. She was laughing
and prancing around as we were being slaughtered
left and right. Laughing! It must’ve been one of those
vile necromancers that command the dead. How
could something so young be so wicked?

•

Did you see Siegfried? A man by that name came
through our village a few months ago. He was in a
foul mood and avoided small talk. He rested, stocked
up on supplies, and then headed into the farbog to the
north, despite us telling him it was a suicidie mission.
Never heard anything of him since then.

Refugees

Word quickly spreads in Shadowgrange that a large group
of refugees have arrived from a neighbouring settlement.
A group of cathars meets them at the village gate and
escorts them to the marketplace, where priests from the
chapel (including Flora) arrive to help treat the wounded.
Cathars and curious villagers alike crowd around the
refugees to find out what happened.
The refugees hail from Mordov, a settlement one day
north of Shadowgrange. Yesterday, Mordov was attacked
by an army of walking dead – these twenty-six refugees
are the only ones that managed to escape. The refugees
distanced themselves from the zombie horde with their
three carriages and horses.
If the characters interview the survivors and voice any
of the following statements or questions, the refugees
respond as indicated:
•

What happened? A fog rolled in from the farbog north
of Mordov. It was thicker than usual and carried a stiff
chill. Many in town knew it to be a bad omen. They
were right. Next we heard the screams. The restless
dead were upon us. The shambling remains of folk
like you and me attacked the living, biting, tearing…
Avacyn protect us!

•

How’d you escape? Us few that survived were the
lucky ones standing near the stables when the undead
attacked. We took any horses still there, along with the
carriages, and rounded up as many folk as we could.
Then we made a blind ride out into the fog. Many of
us didn’t make it…

•

What attacked your village? The walking dead. Corpses
that should be in the ground, peaceful in the Blessed
Sleep. They shambled towards us with pitiless eyes.
All they wanted to do was tear us apart. Cared for

26
Chapter 3: Night of the Dead

Developments

The refugees have more dire news for the crowd around
them: as they fled, the survivors saw brief glimpses of
the horde beginning to move south, in the direction of
Shadowgrange. At the rate they were moving, they’d reach
this village in two days.
Panic ensues when this information is revealed.
Stensians are stoic folk and dealing with horrors is a
grim fact of life, but an entire horde of undead bent on
their annihilation isn’t something they’ve ever had to
face before. The cathars do their best to maintain order
amongst the crowd.
Once she hears about the impending attack, priestess
Flora seeks out the adventurers. A meeting of the village
leaders is to be called immediately and she asks for the
characters to join them.

Art by Svetlin Velinov
Captain Levi stands ready to defend Shadowgrange and its people.

Ill Tidings

With rumors of an undead horde approaching, the leaders
of Shadowgrange call a council meeting to determine
what should be done. As the most capable adventurers in
town, the PCs are invited.
Priestess Flora summons the adventurers to thw town
hall at the Visgaud Grounds, where Eckhardt Sheckt
(proprieter of the Silver Rose Inn and retired cathar) and
Captain Levi (leader of the village militia) are waiting.

You are all gathered in the town hall. Here with you are
Eckhardt, the owner of Silver Rose inn; and Captain
Levi, leader of Shadowgrange’s local cathars. Along with
Priestess Flora, these people comprise the Town Council.
“Well, you all know why we’re here,” Flora says without
preamble. “If what these refugees say is true, there’s a
horde of undead rampaging through the countryside and

they’ll be here in a matter of days. We must figure out
what is to be done.”
There are two main options to discuss: defend the town
or evacuate.
If they defend the town, Captain Levi has 40 cathars
under his command and believes he can conscript an
additional 100 townsfolk (hunters, farmers, tradesfolk) of
varying combat prowess. Priestess Flora and her ten clergy
members can provide divine support to the troops, and
she can call up ten trained bowyers (the Moontouched
Sisters and others) to fight as well.
If they evacuate, there are smaller settlements south of
Shadowgrange within a day’s journey. The next biggest
settlement is the rancher community called Lammas, two
days away. Finally, the greatest military strength nearby is
Silbern, a small community built around Silbern Tower.
This tower is a lodging and base of operations for a group
of cathars called the Silbern Guard, about a hundred

27
Chapter 3: Night of the Dead

trained fighters. Silbern is three days away to the east.
These are the two options that the council members will
argue for, but the characters can come up with different
ideas as well.
This is a chance for the players to throw in their own
advice about how Shadowgrange should meet the threat.
The council members have their own opinions.
Eckhardt: Grim. A seasoned ex-cathar himself, Eckhardt
has his doubts that the village walls can hold, and once
they’re breached, the zombies would easily overrun the
village. He advocates evacuation. “We don’t have enough
cathars to hold off a zombie horde. We need to start
evacuating the village and get the people south.”
Levi: Also grim, but more optimistic. Levi points out
that the roads south are narrow and dangerous. Trying
to protect a thousand evacuating villagers would be next
to impossible and there will bound to be casualties. He
advocates defending the village. “The gates and walls
will hold. If the undead cannot breach out defense, their
superior numbers will mean nothing.”
Flora: Stubborn and fatalistic. Flora sees abandoning
the village as an ultimate failure. Countless generations
are buried in the village crypt, resting eternally in The
Blessed Sleep, and they cannot be forsaken. She advocates
fighting to the bitter end if need be. “Our destiny is in
Avacyn’s hands. She would not want us to abandon our
ancestors.”
This is an encounter best resolved through roleplaying.
Let the characters argue their case for whichever response
they favor. If you feel they have argued persuasively, their
position should carry the day.
Since the characters are probably arguing for a position
favored by at least one of the council members, all they
really need to do is convince the ones that disagree.

Developments

Once the council has settled on a decision, they quickly
go about relaying orders. If the town is to be defended,
skip down to “Defending Shadowgrange.” For details to
evacuate, go to “Evacuation.”
Hours after the council meeting begins, the scouting
group led by Silvia confirms that the zombie horde is
indeed traveling towards Shadowgrange from the north. It
is comprised of about four hundred zombies, three large
stitched abominations, two dozen skeletons, and a female
human that seems to be herding them. At their pace, the
horde should arrive in two days.

28
Chapter 3: Night of the Dead

Awarding Experience Points

Divide 600 XP equally among the characters if the
party succeeds in persuading the council to adopt their
preferred course of action.

Attacking the Horde

Bringing the fight to the undead horde would be suicidal. In
total, the horde is comprised of 400 zombies, 20 skeletons,
3 skaab goliaths, and a necromancer. The adventurers
and any of the townsfolk they’d bring with them would
be greatly outnumbered. The only chance of victory in
battle is to fight them atop Shadowgrange’s walls, where
the defenders can utilize their ranged advantage while the
horde is kept at bay.
The characters can employ hit-and-run tactics while
the horde travels, however. Executed properly, it can
wittle away their numbers before the real engagement at
Shadowgrange. But make sure to emphasize the sheer
magnitude of undead moving together, so the characters
are well aware that attacking head-on would be incredibly
foolish and lethal.
Adventurers leaving immediately northward can easily
find the advancing horde within a day’s journey (the horde
moves slowly as a group, moving at half the speed of
traveling adventurers). Riding horses will shave off a few
more hours of travel time.
The horde moves as a loosely organized group herded
in the right direction by Rinelda Smitt, a necromancer that
stays in the center of the group. Five large wooden wagons
are pulled along with the horde by zombies, which are
used to collect corpses to send back to Mauer Estate.
This horde isn’t so much an “army” as an abnormally
large group of undead wandering in the same direction.
They do not have formations or follow complex tactics.
Any undead that spots the adventurers will instinctively
attack. If they lose sight of the adventurers, or if they stray
too far from the herd, they head back.
Attacking outlying zombies causes some of the
closest undead to take notice. If they spot the assailants,
the zombies shamble forward to attack. This triggers a
domino effect as more and more undead notice what’s
going on and join the battle.
The horde comes in waves, with the first wave
representing outlier zombies furthest from the horde’s
center and moves to involve higher concentrations of
undead more central to the horde until you get to the fifth
wave, the center of the horde where Rinelda resides. The
necromancer is nearly impossible to spot in the crowd.
When a wave joins the battle, the following wave joins
1d6+2 rounds after.

First Wave

3 zombies (MM 316) (PICTURE) rush forward to attack
the characters closest to them. They start by grappling the
target. If the target is grappled, they use their slam attack.

Second Wave

4 zombies arrive using the same tactics as above, along
with 1 skeleton (MM 272)that hangs back and fires with
its shortbow.

Third Wave

8 zombies from deeper inside the horde join the fray,
along with 2 skeletons. Same tactics as above.

Fourth Wave

13 zombies, 1 skeleton, and 1 skaab goliath (APPENDIX
B) (PICTURE). Same tactics as above, while the goliath
wades into battle swinging its morningstar. This is close
to the horde’s center.

Fifth Wave

20 zombies, 5 skeletons, 2 skaab goliaths, and Rinelda
Smitt (APPENDIX B) (PICTURE). This is the horde’s
center.
Same tactics as above. Rinelda tries to stay out of melee.
She prefers to first cast spiritual weapon and sacred flame
on her first turn, and on the following turn try to disable
the most threatening adventurer with hold person. If
pressed into melee, she casts inflict wounds.

Developments

Deduct any destroyed undead from the horde’s total.
Write down which undead were destroyed so you can
update the horde’s numbers in the upcoming siege.
If at any point the characters flee, the undead chase for

a few rounds before returning to their previous position.
If Rinelda is defeated, the horde carry out their last
command and still march in the direction of Shadowgrange,
but fifty zombies wander the wrong way and are deducted
from the horde’s total.
Rinelda Smitt insane. The teen lost her parents at a very
young age and has survived in the wilderness purely off
her talents in necromancy. She is devoid of empathy for
her victims, seeing humans as useful only as resources
to raid for food, clothing, shelter, and their corpses for
undead. The only thing she understands and respects is
power. If her life is on the line, she’ll explain her partnership
with Siegfried, and how she’s culling the land to bring him
corpses for his experiments (see “The Horde’s Purpose”).
Rinelda respects Siegfried’s talents and hopes to learn
everything she can as his apprentice before inevitably
murdering him and taking over his residence.
Rinelda carries basic necessities (clothing, food) along
with a ghoulcaller’s bell (APPENDIX A) (PICTURE), and a
large pouch containing 90 ep and 70 gp. On her person is
a note written by Siegfried, reminding the teen to collect
everything she can find in his shop’s basement, from
papers to alchemical supplies.

Defending Shadowgrange

If the characters choose to defend the town, they can
spend the time before the horde arrives by preparing the
town’s defenses. Let the characters lead the discussion on
what to do during this time. The council members respect
the opinions of capable adventurers, especially when it
comes to battle, and they’ll follow the party’s initiative for
planning.
Adventurers are a delightfully creative and unpredictable
bunch and you should encourage their plans if reasonable.
Reward good planning, whatever it may be. In addition
to the character’s ideas, the council members also voice
opinions on what to do. These preparation quests will yield
benefits in the battle to come (see “Running the Siege”):
• Warding the Walls. Priestess Flora thinks she
can re-ignite the holy wards that used to protect
Shadowgrange’s walls, but she’ll need help doing
so. Any character with proficiency in Intelligence
(Religion) can choose to aid her in performing the
holy rituals to infuse the walls with holy energy. If at
least one character does, Flora and that character can
re-arm the wards by spending eight hours devoted to
carrying out the ritual. Each additional character aiding
in the ritual reduces the time required by four hours.
On success: The walls radiate a faint divine magic.
Lesser undead, such as zombies and skeletons,
are repelled from getting too close, and the skaab
goliaths in “Assault on the Gate” scenario take longer

Art by John Stanko

29
Chapter 3: Night of the Dead

Art by David Palumbo
•

•

•

to destroy the gate.
Finding Runners. Captain Levi suggests finding
suitable messengers amongst the conscripted
townsfolk to relay information between the
characters and council members. This way they
can better coordinate their defences during the
battle. Any character can approach a townsperson
to be a runner. Convincing a person to take the job
requires a Charisma (Diplomacy) check DC 10.
On success: The characters have messengers to keep
them informed of how the battle progresses. In the
“Defending the Breach” scenario, they characters can
arrive earlier, saving more defenders and are rewarded
with an additional influence dice.
Boosting Morale. Eckhardt Sheck knows that the
conscripted townsfolk are terrified of the approaching
horde. These people are not fighters; they are farmers,
shepherds, and tradesmen. They need a confidence
boost to have them perform well in battle. Any character
can try to raise the hopes of the conscripted townsfolk.
They can do so in numerous ways, from a rousing
speech, playing up the strengths of the adventurers,
showing the commoners how to properly wield their
weapons, squashing any talks of hopelessness,
or any other reasonable idea the characters come
up with. An appropriate skill check DC 15 inspires
confidence in the conscripts witnessing this.
On success: Defenders that witness the character’s
actions are inspired, fighting more effectively in the
siege, dealing more damage to the skaab goliaths in
the “Assault on the Gate” scenario.
More Conscripts. Captain Levi points out that the
undead horde still greatly outnumber the defenders.
To help increase the chances of survival, a weapon
should be put into the hands of any person that can
hold it. Levi suggests more aggressively conscripting
any person able to wield a weapon, including children
and the elderly. It will take convincing on the part of the
characters to make this happen, however, as parents
will be reluctant to send their young ones to battle.
As in the “Boosting Morale” quest, the characters can
be creative with their ways and pass an appropriate
skill DC to conscript the children and elderly.
On success: The characters can conscript up to 50
additional young and elderly commoners. These
commoners help deal additional damage to the skaab
goliaths in the “Assault on the Gate” scenario.

Add any other quests that you feel are appropriate to the
situation.
As the characters go about preparing, so do the rest
of the townsfolk. Shadowgrange’s cathars calls upon
all able-bodied citizens to take up arms against the

30
Chapter 3: Night of the Dead

oncoming attack. These conscripted commoners gather
in the town square bringing whatever weapons they have,
from hunting bows to pitchforks, where they await orders.
The rest of the townsfolk rush to evacuate precious
belongings from their outlying homes and farms to the
safety of Shadowgrange’s walls. Noncombatants are
squeezed into the town chapel, which is reinforced with
makeshift barricades.
Once the civilians are accounted for, the cathars and
conscripted soldiers will work day and night to reinforce
the gate and build makeshift barricades along the main
path leading to the market square.
Free Pots. The clergy members seek out the adventurers.
They are well aware that the characters’ prowess will play
a critical factor in defending the town, so they give them
four healing potions for the fight.

Awarding Experience Points

Divide 900 XP equally among the characters if the party
aids the town in preparing defenses.

Evacuation?

This adventure assumes most parties will decide to stand
their ground and defend Shadowgrange. However, they
can choose to flee from the oncoming undead horde. Or
perhaps they evacuate the town, lure the undead inside,
and then set the place on fire, destroying both the town
but also the horde if done correctly. There is no “wrong”
way to attack this problem.
Should the characters choose to flee or evacuate, there
are a few settlements not far from Shadowgrange that
they can travel to. None have the defensible stone walls of
Shadowgrange, but all are encircled by a moat and some
sort of physical barrier, such as wooden palisades or at
the very least somewhat defensible trenches. The closest
settlement is a day away.
There are two notable settlements fairly close to
Shadowgrange. The first is Lammas, a rancher community
stable village two days away. The second is Silbern, a

small community built around Silbern Tower, a lodging
and base of operations for a local group of cathars called
the Silbern Guard. Three days away, this community has
the largest concentration of cathars in Stensia, with a little
over a hundred trained fighters ready to take up arms.
It’s dangerous to travel through Stensia, as the
adventurers probably know already. You may wish to run
some of the random encounters from Part 1 while the
characters travel to other settlements. Lesser undead,
fiends, beasts, and bandits roam preying on travelers.
The zombie horde is on a rampage through the entire
countryside. Their sole purpose is to slay the living and
return the corpses back to Siegfried in Mauer Estate. If
the characters retreat from Shadowgrange, the horde
continues moving south, slaughtering all communities
along the way. Any settlement in the outland valleys of
Stensia will be attacked eventually. Maybe the adventurers
team up with the Silbern Guard and take on the horde at
a different location. Roll with the player’s ideas and it will
all work out in the end.

Running the Siege

An undead army marches on Shadowgrange and its
defenders are prepared to meet them in battle. Keeping
track of hundreds of combatants, including their individual
stats and rolls, would be impossible. Instead, it’s
recommended to run the siege by keeping the adventures
and their personal action as the focus like any other battle,
with the greater battle around them being told mostly
through story rather than dice rolls.
With this method, the battle rages on as a backdrop:
the focus is on the fight between the characters and their
enemies. The larger conflict takes place “offstage,” and
is only relevant to the extent that it helps or hinders the
characters.
The adventurers will act as Shadowgrange’s elite
defense unit in the battle, sent to deal with the toughest,
most dangerous missions. The result of these missions
will determine the ultimate fate of Shadowgrange itself.
Don’t bother tracking the hit points of the various
combatants, except the ones the adventurers are actively
fighting. Just describe the carnage as the defenders
and horde battle it out, while the characters take on the
toughest part of the enemy forces. A short sentence or

Art by Ryan Pancoast

31

two at the end of a round or the end of a battle is great
to maintain the players’ awareness of the ongoing battle
around them and keeps them immersed.

Thinning the Numbers

If the PCs destroyed some of the advancing horde in
“Attacking the Horde” or otherwise, deduct the destroyed
creatures from the horde’s total numbers here. If the
adventurers destroyed any of the three skaab goliaths,
some of the following encounters need to be changed:
• If one goliath was destroyed prior to the siege, then
there is no goliath present at the “Defending the
Breach” battle, making it much easier.
• Any additional skaab goliaths destroyed prior to the
siege (up to three) are subtracted from the “Assault
on the Gate” battle, which gives a huge advantage to
hold the gate.

Horde Tactics

The undead horde’s attack comes during the dead of
night, where they can take advantage of their darkvision.
Shadowgrange’s defenders have at least the light of the
stars and the moon to see by, along with torches lining
their walls to illuminate anyone beside their defenses. The
attack is led by Rinelda Smitt, a necromancer herding the
horde towards Shadowgrange.
The horde’s attack is organized into stages, detailed
below. The actions of the characters can disrupt these
stages; they are presented here as they would play out if
the characters weren’t on hand to aid in Shadowgrange’s
defense.
Stage 1: The undead horde advances on Shadowgrange.
The majority of zombies, led by two skaabs, shambles
forward to break down the gate, while skeleton archers
fire at any defenders they see.
Stage 2: A secondary force of undead attacks led by one
skaab breaches the wall, away from the main fighting at
the gate.
Stage 3: Swarms of undead pour through gaps in the
city defenses created by the skaabs and begin wreaking
havoc.
Stage 4: The undead horde fully enters Shadowgrange,
routing the defenders to the chapel.
Stage 5: Rinelda Smitt personally leads an assault on
the chapel, looking to finish off the remaining defenders.

Assault on the Gate

The horde are traversing the valley and approaching

32
Chapter 3: Night of the Dead

Shadowgrange. It’s night, and none of the defenders
(except maybe an adventurer) has darkvision to see.
Unless the adventurers are attacking, or have provided
the other defenders a way to see the approaching horde,
Captain Levi orders his crossbowmen and archers to hold
fire until they can get a clear shot.
If the adventurers ride out to attack the approaching
horde, use the stats given in “Attacking the Horde” section
earlier.
When the horde (PICTURE) arrives at the walls, read or
paraphrase:

They arrive in the dead of night: hundreds of shambling
humanoids. In the moonlight, their figures silhouettes
can be seen, along with glimpses of their rotted faces.
As they near the walls, torches illuminate their hideous
appearances. The zombies move towards Shadowgrange
with a strange urgency; splashing and flailing in the
moat’s waters, scrambling over each other to reach the
walls, lashing at the gate, tearing, ripping, growling.
Lumbering forward, towering over the other zombies,
are two stitched abominations. Six powerful arms and
three heads are attached to each mass of muscle. These
creatures stride easily through the moat’s waters and
move towards Shadowgrange’s gates, where they start
start pummeling it with armor-plated fists, shaking the
barricade with each blow. Captain Levi begins to yell and
wave a torch to get attention. “Bowmen! Take out those
beasts! Now!”
2 skaab goliaths (APPENDIX B) (PICTURE) begin leading
the attack on the gate. They smash the gate each round,
unless something prevents them from doing so. The gate
can take 10 hits (or 5 rounds of both hitting) total from
the skaabs before being breached. Captain Levi is aware
of the danger they pose and barks out orders to take them
down. If the adventurers completed the quest “Warding
the Walls,” the gate instead can take 12 hits total before
being breached.
The defenders on the walls begin raining down crossbow
bolts and arrows upon the goliaths, dealing 22 damage per
round divided between the two goliaths unless specifically
told to aim at one. If the adventurers completed the quest
“Boosting Morale” or “More Conscripts,” the damage per
round is increased by 4 per quest completed.
To make matters worse, as the order is given to bring
down the goliaths, screams can be heard from atop the
walls. 20 skeleton archers (MM 272) pepper the bowmen
atop the walls, using their darkvision to fire from 40 feet
away. The constant barrage hampers the defender’s ability
to take down the goliaths.
For every five skeletons the adventurers take out, the
defending bowmen can fire more freely, increase their

damage on the goliaths by +2 each round.

characters enlisted as a runner, and they’re given an earlier
warning that a wall is soon to be breached.

Developments

If the skaab goliaths are taken out before the gate is
breached by them, then the gate holds. Regular zombies
stumble over the fallen goliaths to claw at the gate, but
their assault is far weaker than the skaab’s.
If the gate is breached, all is not lost. Eckhardt and his
soldiers, a mix of cathars and conscripts, stand ready to
meet the surge of undead that rush through the broken
gate. Their goal is to drive the undead back long enough
to repair the broken gate.
Regardless of the outcome, a messenger runs over
to the adventurers shortly after either the gate is saved/
breached. The bloodied soldier comes bearing grim news:
one of the far side walls have been breached. The undead
are breaking through, and her squadron of soldiers have
been taking heavy losses trying to hold their position.
Captain Levi will ask the adventurers to reinforce the
breach.
If the adventurers completed the quest “Finding
Runners,” the messenger is one of the people the

Defending the Breach

The undead have breached one of the walls and have
begun pouring in. Without the adventurers intervening at
the breach, that position will almost assuredly be overrun.
If the gate has been breached and the adventurers decide
to defend it instead, you can configure the following
encounter to work for that too.
Once the adventurers arrive at the breach, read or
paraphrase:

The warm glow of fire can be seen over the rooftops ahead
of you, where the sounds of fighting can be heard. As you
turn the corner, you see two wooden cabins aflame next
to the wall, illuminating the scene in front of you. Fighting
amidst the bright glow in a tight formation are the cathars,
clashing with dozens of undead humanoids. More still

Art by Volkan Baga

33

Possible effects include:

Art by Raymond Swanland

pour into the street from a breach in the wall 10 feet wide,
clambering over the stone debris and eagerly rushing to
the living defenders. “By Avacyn’s Might, we hold!” shouts
a cathar, even as the soldiers are slowly pushed back.
If the adventurers leave for the breach quickly, then they
find a heated battle between the invading undead and the
village defenders. A dozen soldiers fight here against everincreasing numbers of zombies. These eleven cathars
statted as guards (MM 347), along with a single clergy
member (treat her as a priest [MM 348] without Divine
Eminence, no 2nd or 3rd level spells, and only 10 HP).
If the adventurers took their time getting here, or didn’t
complete the “Finding Runners” quest, five of these
cathars are dead when they arrive.
The cathars’ goal is to push the undead out long enough
to barricade the breach, but they don’t have the numbers
to do so. Only with the adventurer’s help in the fight can
they hope to accomplish their task.

Optional: Influence Dice

In this battle, the adventurers are given their own targets
to eliminate while the cathars fight their own battles with
the undead in the background. To help illustrate the fight,
you may consider using this optional Influence Dice
mechanic, where the combatants in the backdrop can still
influence the party’s battle while still being rolls-light.
Represent the background defender’s influence in the
fight with two Ally Dice (d6’s), or only one dice if five
cathars are already dead. Represent the background
undead’s influence with three Enemy Dice.
At the end of each round, roll the dice for each side.
For every 6 in the result, that side does something that
affect’s the party’s fight. If the 6 is a result of the Ally Dice
roll, it’s a help; if it’s a result of the Enemy Dice roll, it’s a
hindrance.
For every result of 5, that side does something that affects
the party’s fight, but at a negative cost to themeselves.

34
Chapter 3: Night of the Dead

Help
A cathar fires a crossbow
bolt into an enemy that
one of the characters is
engaged with. The enemy
takes 4 damage.
A gust of spectral wind is
felt as the spirit of Saint
Traft materializes on the
battlefield and swings his
greatsword at the PC’s
enemy, dealing 2d6+5
damage and knocking
the target prone, before
his spirit is swept away
elsewhere by the wind.

Hindrance
A zombie catches a
character unaware with a
slammed fist into its back,
dealing 4 damage.

The clergy member rushes
over to a wounded character and casts cure wounds,
healing 7 hit points, before
rejoining the cathars in
the background battle.
A cathar joins the party’s
battle, rushing to help the
most wounded looking
character.

Zombies dogpile on one
of the cathars and start
devouring his flesh as his
comrades fight desperately to save him.

One zombie or skeleton
joins the battle.

The upper half of a zombie
latches onto a random
PC’s legs, restraining the
PC. Strength check DC 10
to escape the restraint.

Waves of Undead

In order to hold the line and drive the undead back, the
characters must defeat several waves of increasingly
dangerous attackers while the cathars fight their own
undead foes in the background. Allow each wave’s
resulting combat to play out, then let the next wave
arrive one or two rounds after. This gives the characters
a small window to ready themselves for the next fight.
Alternatively, if the characters are finding combat too easy,
you can have subsequent waves arrive faster.

First Wave

3 zombies (MM 316) rush forward to attack the characters
closest to them, along with 3 skeletons (MM 272) that
hang back and fire at the characters with their shortbows.
If you are using Influence Dice, remove one of the
Enemy Dice after the party defeats the first wave.

Second Wave

Many undead fall, yet more pour in through the breach.
An anguished, unearthly chorus of shrieks is heard
from above. Swooping down into the battle is a spectral
humanoid figure draped in tattered rags and dangling iron
chains. The shrieking emits from large gaping mouths all
over its body that glow an intense bright blue.
A shriekgeist (PICTURE), statted as a specter (MM 279),
has been lured to the ensuing carnage like a moth to a
flame. It attacks the adventurers with incomprehensible
hatred.
2 zombies and 2 skeletons also join the battle using the
same tactics as above.
If you are using Influence Dice, remove one of the
Enemy Dice after the party defeats the second wave.

Third Wave

A low, booming roar is heard from the wall, followed
by shouts of surprise and despair as a hulking stitched
abomination heaves itself through the breach. It swings
morningstar down at the nearest cathar, slamming the
poor human deep into the earth with a sickening crunch
and a spatter of blood. More zombies squeeze through as
the skaab moves forward.
2 zombies, 1 skeleton, and 1 skaab goliath (APPENDIX B)
(PICTURE). Same tactics as above.

Developments

If the adventurers defeat all three waves, the cathars
destroy the remaining undead and have enough time to
seal up the breach with a makeshift barricade of wood and
stone debris. It’s not very strong, but it’s enough to deter
the undead from entering through here.
If the adventurers retreat from the battle instead, then
the position is quickly overrun by undead. While many
more zombies enter through the breach, all is not lost,
since the horde as a whole isn’t organized enough to take
full advantage of this entrance and send more numbers
through. Any surviving cathars retreat back to the gate to
inform Captain Levi of the situation, which he responds
to by leading a group of his best soldiers to launch a
counterattack and reclaim the area.

Results

The location of the next encounter, “Necromancer
Confrontation,” depends on the adventurer’s previous
actions:
• If both the gate and the breach were successfully
defended, a frustrated Rinelda scales the wall and
makes a last-ditch attempt to defeat the defenders

•
•

with her remaining forces.
If either the gate or wall breach was lost, then Rinelda
enters through that location with her remaining forces.
If both the gates and the wall breach were lost,
then the undead overrun the outer defenses. The
defenders are routed, and a messenger comes to the
adventurers telling them to regroup at the chapel.
The adventurers have enough time for a short rest
before an overconfident Rinelda leads the final assault
against the chapel, calling out any champions to face
her.

Necromancer Confrontation

A messenger arrives from Captain Levi, requiring the
party’s immediate assistance: a necromancer has arrived
and is cutting through his troops. The adventurers are
needed to stop her onslaught.
When the characters arrive, dozens of defenders and
zombies are locked in battle. Rinelda Smitt stands out
amongst the crowd, squaring off with Captain Levi. The
cathar commander, statted as a thug (MM 350; Lawful
Good), is barely hanging in there -- he’s down to 10 hit
points and suffering from 1 level of exhaustion. Rinelda is
toying with him using her spiritual weapon (in the form of
a spectral dagger) to stab at him.
If you want to use Influence Dice in this battle, represent
the defenders fighting here with two Ally Dice, and the
undead two Enemy Dice.
Rinelda Smitt (APPENDIX B) (PICTURE) travels with
3 zombies (MM 316) that she uses as her personal
bodyguards. If attacked, she’ll use her reaction to shove
a zombie in front of the blow if possible. Rinelda prefers
to fight at range, casting hold person and sacred flames
as appropriate while swinging with her spiritual weapon
spell.
The necromancer has a terrible temper and delusions
of immortality, considering how well she’s survived all her
life so far. She can be coaxed into fighting recklessly, and if
pressed into melee, she casts inflict wounds.

Developments

Rinelda Smitt is insane The teen lost her parents at a very
young age and has survived in the wilderness purely off
her talents in necromancy. She is devoid of empathy for
her victims, seeing humans as useful only as resources
to raid for food, clothing, shelter, and their corpses for
undead. She offers no remorse because such a feeling is
alien to her.
The only thing Rinelda understands and respects is
power. If her life is on the line, she’ll explain her partnership
with Siegfried, and how she’s culling the land to bring him

35
Chapter 3: Night of the Dead

Art by Karl Kopinski

corpses for his experiments (see “The Horde’s Purpose”).
Rinelda respects Siegfried’s talents and hopes to learn
everything she can as his apprentice before inevitably
murdering him and taking over his residence.
Rinelda carries basic necessities (clothing, food) along
with a ghoulcaller’s bell (APPENDIX A) (PICTURE), and a
large pouch containing 5 ep and 92 gp. On her person is
a note written by Siegfried, reminding the teen to collect
everything she can find in his shop’s basement, from
papers to alchemical supplies.

Victory!

With Rinelda defeated, the undead briefly falter, looking
dazed. A loud cheer erupts from nearby defenders as they
see the adventurer’s victory. The people fight fiercer with
renewed resolve, pushing back the horde and eventually
vanquishing them. It takes another two hours to clean up
any undead roaming within the town’s walls.
How well the defenders fared depends on the
adventurer’s accomplishments. If both the gate and wall
breach held, then casualties and property damage are
shockingly few. The more failed objectives, the worse the
death toll and damage to Shadowgrange.
The townsfolk spend the next day carrying out postbattle activities: clergy members tend to the wounded,
cathars dismantle barricades, tradesfolk begin repairing
damages, and other people help with gathering the dead
to be buried later.
A group of cathars rides out to cleanse the surrounding
valley of any pockets of undead still roaming the land. The
few scattered zombies are easily disposed of. When the
cathars return, they bring news that some of the zombies
were guarding large wooden wagons, some empty and
others holding corpses.
Once all the immediate concerns are taken care of,
Priestess Flora invites the characters to a great victory
celebration. The celebration begins with a rousing speech
by Flora in front of the chapel, where she publicly thanks the
characters eachby name. Take the time to play this scene

36
Chapter 3: Night of the Dead

out, and make sure to call out a couple of key actions of
bravery or even luck that each character displayed during
the battle. Without the party’s help, hundreds of people
would now be dead and Shadowgrange would have been
lost.
At the end of the speech, Flora motions to bring forth a
large chest filled with coins to be given to the adventurers
as thanks. Assuming the characters succeeded on each
objective, the chest contains 2,100 cp, 1,050 sp, and 260
gp. Reduce the amount of coins depending on how many
objectives were failed, as the town will need more money
to repair damages incurred in the battle.
After the chest is presented and the crowd finishes
cheering for the adventurers, Eckhardt approaches
them and asks for a word in private. When they move
somewhere more quiet, the innkeeper solemnly gifts the
party two of the best items from the cathars’ armory. If
Captain Levi fell in battle, these are his personal items,
and Eckhardt explains that the deceased cathar would
be honored if his arms continued to slay the wicked. The
gifts are a +1 weapon and +1 armor/shield. Customize
the weapon and armor to your party: for example, if a
Dexterity-focused rogue still needs a weapon and prefers
using a rapier, perhaps the weapon is a +1 rapier called
Kindness; its handguard decorated in silver filigree in the
shape of a thousand feathers; it glows pale blue in the
presence of fiends.

Defeat!

If the characters failed to defeat Rinelda but succeeded
in either holding the gate or the wall breach, then the
necromancer forces the defenders to retreat to the chapel
while the horde overruns the rest of Shadowgrange. Here
the adventurers have enough time for a short rest before
Rinelda gathers her forces for a final assault. This is the
final chance to stop the undead and save the town.
If the adventurers fail to stop Rinelda at the chapel, then
the defenders are broken. Priestess Flora and the rest of
the surviving council members rallies what’s left of the
townsfolk for one desperate push, fighting their way out
of Shadowgrange. They take heavy losses doing so, but
eventually the survivors make it out alive. The undead
horde is too disorganized to give chase.
Priestess Flora contacts the characters and thanks
them for their aid, but she is unable to hide the bitterness
and despair in her voice. There is no ceremony, and this
meeting is rushed. Shadowgrange is lost, and its people
flee south to neighboring communities as refugees.
Word of the horde’s rampage travels to Silbern (see
“Evacuation”) and perhaps the cathars there mobilize
enough troops to stop the horde. Or maybe the vampire
families step in, destroying the undead to protect their

human livestock.

Developments

After the adventurers have a bit of time to recover from the
battle, Priestess Flora contacts them. She explains that her
people have never encountered an undead horde like the
one they faced. Flora knows that the stitched horrors, the
skaabs, are the foul work of necro-alchemists. If the army
was built by such people, it may be that the horde they
encountered is but a precursor to more attacks to come.
For the sake of all Stensia, Flora begs the adventurers to
find the source of these undead and stop it once and for
all. The refugees from Mordov said that the horde came
from the north, and the most notable location north of
there is Mauer Estate, a long-abandoned mansion that
has housed many residents over the centuries, from
ancient royalty to mad wizards.
If the adventurers mention Siegfried, either their
findings in his alchemy shop or the note on Rinelda Smitt,
then Priestess Flora agrees that he could be the source.
Siegfried was last seen heading in the direction of Mauer
Estate, and if they have evidence that he turned to necroalchemy, then it seems like he would be the first one the
adventurers should confront.

Awarding Experience Points

Divide 2,000 XP equally among the characters if the party
helps save the townsfolk from the undead horde.
If the undead horde is defeated, award another 4,800 XP
equally among the characters.

Conclusion of Part 3

Part 3 begins once the adventurers decide to head north
to Mauer Estate, where Siegfried works tirelessly to create
even more fearsome threats.

Milestone: Level 4!

If you are using Milestone Experience, then the characters
attain 4th level after the horde has been dealt with.

37
Chapter 3: Night of the Dead

Art by James Paick

Part 4: Into the Farbog
In this part of the adventure, the characters travel to
Mauer Estate, located at the northern edge of Stensia’s
outer valley. To do so, they will need to journey through a
large bog that divides the southern part of the valley from
its northern tip.
Depending on which NPCs the characters met and
which quests or clues they picked up, some or all the
following information might be known to them:
• Priestess Flora wants the characters to travel to Mauer
Estate and uncover the source of the undead.
• Rinelda Smit can confirm that Siegfried is the creator
of the undead armies and is working at Mauer Estate.
• Silvia Wintsch wants the characters to bring her any
sanguine lotus they find in the bog.
• Siegfried holds the missing piece of the Strionic
Resonator, which some of the characters may have
been tasked to retrieve for the Church of Avacyn.

38
Chapter 4: Into the Farbog

Farbog Superstitions

If the characters agree to Priestess Flora’s request to check
out Mauer Estate, she thanks them for their courage and
commitment to righteousness. Flora warns them to be
careful while traversing the farbog (Innistrad’s fancy term
for bog/swamp) that the adventurers must pass through
to reach the estate. In particular, she warns them about
hellhounds: “I know you’re strong and capable adventurers,
but trust me, if you come across a hellhound… run.” This
warning is particularly important to give the characters, as
it sets up the “Hounds of Baskerville” encounter.
Once the characters accept Flora’s mission, word
spreads around town of the character’s impending
journey through the farbog (Flora tells her clergymen,
they tell friends and relatives, and it spreads). Helpful,
but superstitious townsfolk approach the party members
and offer advice on how to stay safe. The suggestions
range from reasonably insightful to ignorance. Some
suggestions include:
• Never stare into a hellhound’s eyes or it will devour
your soul.
• Eat wormwood and other bitter herbs; it will make

•
•
•
•
•
•

you less palatable to things that roam the night (the
townsfolk that suggests it offers the character some of
the aforementioned herb).
Travel by day and rest at roadside shrines by night.
If you hear howling at midnight, someone close to you
will die.
Be quiet while traversing the ancient grafs (Innistrad’s
fancy term for “crypt”) inside the farbog, lest you wake
the dead.
Pale ghosts are the friendly kind, except when they’re
not.
Travel by night and rest at roadside shrines by day.
If a black cat crosses the road in front of you, it’s a
sign of bad luck.

If the characters ask about the farbog itself, they can find
out from various townsfolk that it’s a treacherous swamp
that people avoid if possible. One prominent rumor is
that the farbog used to be a beautiful forest with one of
the most influential settlements in all of Innistrad, but an
evil tainted the forest, turning it into the farbog it is now.
The bog has a well-known reputation for being the
residence of hellhounds, though it’s also said that few
folk are lucky enough to see one and live to tell the tale.
Others mention that ancient grafs dissolve into the muck,
causing the restless dead to stir as geists (spirits) and
ghouls.

Traveling to the Swamp

It takes one day of traveling north through the outer valley
to reach the farbog. A few abandoned communities can
be found in between Shadowgrange and the bog; the
undead horde passed through these settlements on their
way to Shadowgrange, killing most of the inhabitants
and sending their corpses back to Mauer Estate. None
of these communities are remarkable: each is comprised
of outlying farms and cabins huddled together, with a
modest chapel for prayer. If you wish, you can place one
of these villages in the path of the characters, offering
the opportunity to explore the wreckage. Perhaps a few
people managed to survive the undead’s rampage and
still live here. Or maybe some undead still linger in the
area, hungering for the living.
The zombie horde left Mauer Estate and trekked south,
through the farbog, through the small villages, all the
way to Shadowgrange. Their footprints are easy to spot
and follow back to the estate. In addition to footprints,
heavy wagon wheels can be followed. These wagons were
carried by the horde and filled with corpses. Once filled,
the wagon would be hauled back to Mauer Estate, where
Siegfried would use them in his experiements.

The Farbog

Once the adventurers enter the farbog, read or paraphrase:
The grassy plains of the valley dampens into inky black
muck as you enter the farbog. Barren pine trees sink into
the mud at odd angles, creating a tangle of dead trunks. A
dreary grey mist envelopes the area.
The farbog is muddy, damp, and stinks of rotting
vegetation. A mist surrounds the area; it doesn’t impede
nearby vision, but anything beyond 300 feet disappears
behind the grey curtain.
The ground is a mix of muddy earth and shallow bog.
Traveling through here is considered difficult terrain (see
the rulebook for more information). The zombie horde
mostly stuck to the main road that passes through the
swamp; adventurers following the main road or zombie
horde can easily track hundreds of shambling footprints
and heavy wagon wheels dragged through the muck.
Following the main road, which runs north to south, is
the easiest way to journey through the swamp towards
Mauer Estate.

Swamp Encounters

Traveling through the swamp takes one day. Along the
journey through the farbog, the characters will partake in
three of the following events below (though feel free to
run as many events as you wish!).
Choose three of the events, marking when they occur
(day/night). Alternatively, roll a D6 and consult the Swamp
Encounters table to determine what the party meets,
rerolling any 6 or duplicate results.
The difficulty of combat encounters and their subsequent
XP awards assume a party of four level 4’s. If this is not
the case in your game, or if you wish to make the combat
easier or harder, you may tweak the combat encounters to
your desired difficulty with Kobold Fight Club or similar
builders.
d8
1
2
3
4
5

Event
The Hounds of
Baskerville
Whispers of Hope
and Doom
Deadly Lotus
Little Girl’s Plea
Corpse Wagons

The Hounds of Baskerville

This encounter works best if the characters have been

39
Chapter 4: Into the Farbog

previously warned about hellhounds in the swamp (See
“Farbog Superstitions”).
As the characters journey through the swamp, they
pass by the sunken remains of a long-forgotten village
called Baskerville. What little remains of the crumbling
and sunken village structures is barely recognizable in
the overgrowth and muck. The skeletal remains of many
of the villagers can be found littered around the area. A
Wisdom (Medicine) DC 12 reveals none of them died
from physical violence. A Wisdom (Insight) DC 15 check
indicates that the people appear to have all died in a state
of absolute terror.
The area filled with gloomgas mushrooms. These
mushrooms release spores with hallucinogenic properties
as the characters pass through. The spores fill the air and
mixes invisibily with the surrounding fog.
The gloomgas mushrooms grow at the base of the
surrounding pine trees, blending perfectly with the bark.
The spore clouds are released with a low rumbling sound

that echoes throughout the area and is almost impossible
to pinpoint its origins. Characters can spot one of these
mushrooms with a DC 25 Perception check. A Nature DC
20 can identify a spotted gloomgas mushroom.
Every round that a character is exposed to the spores,
they must make a DC 15 Constitution check or be poisoned
by the spore’s hallucinogenic properties. Characters that
don’t breathe or are immune to poison are unaffected.
Since the characters traveling through this part of the
swamp are likely exposed to the spores for minutes or
longer, it can be assumed that anyone not immune is
eventually poisoned.
A poisoned character gradually begins to hallucinate.
Read or paraphrase for them:

The fog grows cloyingly thick and surrounds you utterly.
The pine trees seem taller here, leaning over you as if to
snatch you with gnarled, claw-like branches. The muck
you trek through sucks down your foot more with each

40
Art by Kajito

step you take, making it harder to move. The world is
closing in on you.
Then you hear it: a low rumbling growl that emanates all
around you. The growling gets louder; its tone is of sheer
malice.
The growling sound is a perversion caused by the
hallucination: it is actually the rumbling sound of the
gloomgas mushrooms, but when heard by someone
hallucinating from the spores, it sounds like a monstrous
hound growling. This is the origin of the hellhound rumor.
Give the poisoned characters a moment to react to the
sound. Afterwards, read or paraphrase for them:

You spot them out of the corner of your vision: twin fiery
red orbs burning through the cloak of fog. They move
closer, and you see the rest of the figure emerge – a
monstrous hound, as tall as a human, stepping forward
on thick, muscular legs. As it growls, the beast exhales
embers from its open maw filled with razor-sharp teeth
and revealing a hot glow emanating from its throat.
You hear more growling from behind. Turning around,
you see a second fiendish hound approaching from the
opposite direction. Suddenly, the two beasts rush toward
you in a full sprint, their eyes blazing with unbridled
hatred.
These 2 hellhounds (MM 182) are actually hallucinations
caused by the gloomgas mushroom’s spores. Only
characters hallucinating from the spores can see, hear,
or be affected by them. The hounds circle around and
strike at the weakest looking character, using their pack
tactics to eliminate the target quickly before moving to
the next. They use their Fire Breath if they can hit two or
more characters with it. All damage dealt by the hounds
to hallucinating characters looks like physical wounds,
but in fact the characters are unknowingly taking psychic
damage instead.
There are a few ways for a poisoned character to recognize
the illusion. When a character is damaged for the first time
by a hellhound, they must make a DC 15 Wisdom saving
throw. On a success, they notice something “off” about
the hellhound – its features are hazy and blurred, it leaves
no footprints, there’s no weight to its attacks, etc. After
this success, they can spend an action to concentrate on
the hound, making a DC 10 Wisdom saving throw. On this
success, the character shakes off the hallucination and the
hellhounds disappear for them.
Alternatively, a character not hallucinating can help a
poisoned ally shake off its effects by convincing the person
that no hell hounds exist. They can stand in the same spot
as where the “hellhound” stands, or try to explain that
they are hallucinating, or anything else they can come up

with. Doing so takes an action. When this is done, the ally
can immediately make a DC 10 Wisdom saving throw.

Awarding Experience Points

Divide 1,400 XP equally among the characters if the
party defeats the hell hounds and/or shake off the
hallucination.

Whispers of Hope and Doom

As you journey through the bog, you hear a shrill scream
emanating from all around you. A dark red mist emerges
from the ground all around you, mixing with the pervasive
fog, thickening like a blood clot. The red mist envelopes
the area, so thick that you can barely see your hand in
front of you. Your entire body is quickly covered by a thin
layer of this bloody substance, and the air smells of fire
and brimstone.
The adventurers walk through a part of the farbog that is
home to a colony of hellscream fungi that thrive on the
rotting vegetation languishing in the muck. The fungi
release a cloud of spores as the adventurers pass by,
enveloping the surrounding area in a thick bloody red 200
ft. radius “fog” that smells similar to fire and brimstone.
The opaque fog heavily obscures vision (see “Vision and
Light” in the Player’s Handbook p183). The spores coat
exposed surfaces -- including the adventurers -- but are
otherwise harmless. The fungi can be identified with a
successful DC 20 Intelligence (Nature) check. The spore
cloud disperses after an hour.
Unfortunately for the adventurers, the spore cloud is
the least of this area’s hazards. As they wander through
the spore cloud, a will-o’-wisp (p301) approaches them.

You see an orb of warm light pierce through the red fog.
As it bobs up and down excitedly, you hear a faint whisper
that says, “Follow me, travelers. You are grave danger
here. Hurry!”
Technically, the wisp does not lie: the adventurers are in
grave danger. But the wisp is the danger. An adventurer
that does not trust the wisp can roll a Wisdom (Insight)
check against the wisp’s Charisma (Deception) check
(+0) to gauge its intent.
In truth, the wisp aims only to distract the adventurers
and lead them in circles inside the spore cloud, because
this is the hunting ground of its master, a grell (MM
p172). If attacked, the wisp goes invisible and backs away,
content to watch its master feed while it hisses taunts
at the adventurers. If the grell is killed however, the wisp
lashes out in a rage, spitting curses and vile phrases as it
fights to the death. (Note that the wisp’s vision is heavily

41
Chapter 4: Into the Farbog

Art by Jason Engle

obscured by the spore cloud.)
Meanwhile, the grell tries to sneak up behind the group.
With its blindsight, the aberration isn’t affected by the
spore cloud at all. If all the adventurers are effectively blind
then the grell automatically succeeds in sneaking up, as it
makes no sound while flying and the adventurers can’t see
it. Otherwise, roll a Stealth check (+6) against the Passive
Perception of adventurers that can see through the spore
cloud. The aberration attacks anyone that gets separated
from the group. If no opportunity arises, it attacks an
adventurer that stands at the back of the group. The grell
tries to grapple and paralyze its prey and then float away
back to its lair with the character paralyzed character in its
clutches.

Developments

The grell lairs in a makeshift treehouse made of petrified
wood up in the strong, sprawling branches of a nearby oak
tree. The treehouse is a single room that houses the grell’s
nest made up of twigs and small branches. There are no
ropes or ladders to reach the house, but an adventurer

42
Chapter 4: Into the Farbog

can climb up to it with a DC 10 Strength (Athletics) check.
If the grell manages to sneak off with a paralyzed
adventurer, it brings them here before knocking them
unconscious to be a meal for later.

Treasure

Scattered inside the treehouse is a small collection of
items the grell kept from its previous victims. Rummaging
through the nest will uncover 30 cp, 15 sp, 5 gp, a bag
of holding (DMG p153), and a wizard’s spellbook with
the following spells written inside: alarm, color spray,
thunderwave, unseen servant, arcane lock, rope trick.
In addition, there is a small ribbed glass bottle with a
sparkling silvery gas floating inside. This is a message
bottle (see APPENDIX A). Uncorking the bottle releases
the gas, and all in the immediate area hear the voice of
the will-o’-wisp begin to speak, “it killed me... I watched
it devour my body while I could do nothing... NOTHING!
This damned beast! I hate it! It is invulnerable, cannot be
killed, my master...” With that, the silvery gas dissipates.
The will-o’-wisp was once a traveler that was killed

by the grell. With an all-consuming need for revenge, it
assaulted the grell, only to find out that the aberration was
completely immune to its electricity attack. The wisp was
slowly driven insane by this revelation, and in a cruel irony,
its shattered psyche came to love the grell that murdered
it, helping the creature feed on passing travelers.

Awarding Experience Points

Divide 1,250 XP equally among the characters if the party
defeats the grell and the will-o’-wisp.

Deadly Lotus

Before running this event, it’s important that you as the
DM know what the party’s marching order is. Specifically,
you need to know who is marching in front and how close
people are following behind. This is a good habit to know
in general, but this particular event requires it.

Your dulled senses trekking through the dreary swamp
suddenly perk up as you notice sharp, vibrant patches
of red that practically glow in the muck ahead of you:
beautiful red lotus flowers floating in the shallow water.
A DC 15 Wisdom (Perception) check spots the remnants
of lotus flowers around the area, but they have been
trampled and destroyed by the zombie horde. A dozen of
the flowers up ahead are untouched, however, as there are
no footprints around them.
A DC 15 Intelligence (Nature) check correctly identifies
these as the rare sanguine lotus, whose petals are used to
create powerful healing potions. If the adventurer has the
quest “Find the Lotus” from Silvia, then they automatically
identify the plant. The sanguine lotus are harmless and
pose no threat to the characters.
The quicksand that the lotus petals float in, however,
is definitely a threat. The patch of quicksand is 20 feet
in diameter. A DC 15 Survival check tells a character in
advance that something is not right with the patch of
ground containing the quicksand, but the character
must actively be searching for such dangerous ground.
Running or charging characters have no chance to detect
the quicksand before falling prey to it.
Any character marching in front that isn’t aware of the
quicksand will step in it. If one or more adventurers fall
into the quicksand, read:

Your walk comes to an abrupt halt as you notice your feet
have become stuck in a pool of silty water. Your feet don’t
budge, and a moment later you start to feel a crushing
weight on them as you slowly begin getting sucked down
into the muck.

Once a creature has set foot in quicksand, its natural
tendency is to struggle to free itself. Any type of struggle
will actually have the opposite effect. Moving any portion
of the body that has been submerged causes the sand to
shift from underneath the moved body part, thus sucking it
deeper into the morass. The best way to escape quicksand
is to simply lie still. Once a creature stops struggling, it
will naturally float just as it would if it were in a pool of
still water, albeit rising more slowly due to the weight of
the sand.
Effects of Quicksand: Characters in quicksand must
make a DC 10 Swim check every round to simply tread
water in place, or a DC 15 Swim check to move 5 feet.
Failing these checks by 5 or more results in sinking and
the very real possibility of drowning.
Rescue: Pulling out a character trapped in quicksand
can be difficult. The rescuer needs a branch, spear haft,
rope, or similar tool that enables him to reach the victim
with one end of it. Then he must make a DC 15 Strength
check to successfully pull the victim, and the victim must
make a DC 10 Strength check to hold onto the branch,
pole, or rope. If both checks succeed, the victim is pulled
5 feet closer to safety. If the victim fails to hold on, he must
make a DC 15 Swim check immediately to stay above the
surface.
The quicksand isn’t the only danger here, however. A
lumberknot (statted as a shambling mound; MM p270)
(PICTURE) lies dormant nearby, perfectly blended into the
undergrowth. When an adventurer falls into the quicksand,
the lumberknot comes to life and lurches towards the
party to consume them.

Suddenly the undergrowth near the quicksand rises from
the ground. A rotting heap of oak looms up half again as
tall as a human, its midsection bursting open to reveal
a cruel gaping “maw” crowned by rows of savage, stakelike “teeth.” It shambles towards you, the roots and vines
wrapped around its figure animating and stretching out in
your direction.
The lumberknot moves at a slow 20 feet, so adventurers
not stuck in quicksand can potentially outrun it. If
brought below 30 hit points, the treefolk feigns death,
collapsing into a rotting heap of inanimate vegetation.
If not subsequently killed, the central root-stem, the
lumberknot’s “brain,” beds down in its remains to slowly
regrow its full body.

Developments

The adventurers can collect up to a dozen sanguine lotus
if they can retrieve them from the quicksand. The lotus
petals last for a week before rotting. If they are returned

43
Chapter 4: Into the Farbog

alive to Silvia, she pays the adventurers 50 gp (-5gp for
each missing lotus) and gives them three vials of life’s
blood (see APPENDIX A).

Awarding Experience Points

Divide 1,800 XP equally among the characters if the party
defeats the lumberknot.

A Little Girl’s Plea

As the adventurers travel through the farbog, or perhaps
while they stop to rest, they are approached by a geist
(spirit).

A voice calls out to you: it sounds like a little girl, but the
voice is strange, warped, like hearing the message through
the end of a long metal tube. “Please, misters. Please help
me! Mum and dad are hurting and left me. Will you bring
them back to me?” Looking around, you notice a small
humanoid figure, her features hidden under silken sheets.
The spirit’s translucent body emits a soft pale glow.
The ghost is of Anna Helmvin, a little girl that died here
long ago in a time when the barren swamp held a thriving
community. She poses no threat to the characters, but
follows them for a while, begging them to help her. If
attacked, she turns invisible and runs away sobbing.
Anna will freely answer any questions the adventurers
have, but her knowledge is restricted by when she was
“awake” and is filtered through her child psyche. Here is a
list of things she knows that the characters may ask about:
• This place was once a village. People were happy.
• Anna and her parents died when their house burned
down. Anna died in her room, her parents died trying
to save her.
• Her parent’s spirits were really sad and angry for not
saving Anna, but eventually all of them found peace
in the Blessed Sleep when the villagers buried them
• Anna doesn’t know what happened around here while
she was sleeping.
• Anna and her parents woke up recently when “bad
men” dug up their graves.
• Anna can lead characters to the graves, and point
them in the direction that the “bad men” fled to.
The grave site is located on a small hill not far from
where the adventurers meet Anna. The three graves have
been dug up and the shovels used for the digging have
been left on the ground beside them. The remains of Anna
and her parents are still in their graves, however a DC 15
Intelligence (Investigation) reveals to anyone searching
the bodies that jewelery -- rings, necklaces, braclets -have clearly been ripped off the skeletons, with bits of

44
Chapter 4: Into the Farbog

gold, silver, and a pearl left over. The shovels left here,
the hurriedly removed jewelery, and the running footprints
leaving the area point that the robbers were fleeing.
Adventurers can track the footprints or follow where
Anna pointed (she cannot venture too far from her
grave). Along the way, they come across a charred corpse
clutching a pearl necklace missing a bead. This was one of
the robbers, and it looks like he was burned alive.
The characters can continue following the track until
they come across a roadside shrine where the second
robber is staying.

Up ahead the muddy swamp floor abruptly gives away to
a circle dry earth. Sprouting in the midst of this circle is
a wide pine tree stump. Carved from what used to be its
trunk and rising up from its stump is the symbol of the
Church: Avacyn’s Collar.
Sitting beside the shrine is a human clothed in
mudcaked wools and leathers. He cautiously holds a light
crossbow in his hands, his tired eyes constantly scanning
the swamps around him.
The second robber, Bran Halfhelm (a commoner; MM
345), has stayed at this road shrine for two days now. He
is a refugee from Mordov (see “Refugees”). Him and his
brother, Rickard, managed to escape the slaughter by
running deep into the farbog. They hoped to cross the
swamp and seek shelter at one of the northern villages.
Fleeing with just the clothes on their backs, they happened
upon Anna’s grave site and decided to rob it for a chance
to have enough money to pay for a hot meal and a place
to stay once they reached a village.
Unfortunately for Bran and Rickard, their grave robbery
awoke the spirits, and two fiery geists (Anna’s parents)
chased them down. Rickard was caught and burned alive,
but Bran managed to reach the safety of this roadside
shrine, where the angry spirits cannot reach him. He is
certain that the geists are waiting for him to leave the
circle to kill him.
Bran begs the adventurers to protect him from the
geists. At first, he does not mention that he robbed the
graves, only that angry geists chased him here and killed
his brother. If the adventurers press him, Bran will reveal
the truth, but stress that he was desperate, having lost
everything to the zombie horde, and needs the money to
pay for basic needs if he ever gets out of the swamp (which
is true). He argues that the dead don’t need jewelery.
If the adventurers convince Bran to hand over his
stolen jewlery, he gives them a gold ring with etchings of
soaring herons on its outside (worth 25gp), and a silver
bracelet with a sapphire stylishly embedded into its center
(worth 20gp). The gold ring is one of two wedding rings
-- Bran withholds the second one, though an appropriate

Intelligence check can figure out that there should be
two wedding rings, or a Wisdom (Insight) check notices
that Bran might be holding something back. Though he’s
desperate for some money, Bran values his life above all
else, so he’ll hand over the final item if pressured to.

Developments

The ghosts of Anna’s parents cannot enter the shrine’s
circle, so they patiently wait. If Bran leaves 300 feet from
the shrine’s circle, they materialize as two fire geists
(APPENDIX B) and attack him relentlessly. If Bran dies,
they will then attack anyone else holding their wedding
rings.
Defeating the geists does not satisfy Anna, who says
that her parents are still hurting, and they’ll just come
back later. She thinks that “putting their stuff back” will be
the only way her parents will go back to sleep.
Returning the wedding rings back to the parent’s graves
is the only way to return their spirits to the Blessed Sleep.
If this is done:

You feel a soothing breeze pass by you. Anna appears
in front of you, no longer shrouded in silks but a happy,
beaming girl in a dress. Standing right behind her parents,
smiling at nodding at you. “You gave me back my mommy
and daddy. Thank you!” The three spirits then fade away.

Awarding Experience Points

Divide 1,400 XP equally among the characters if the party
defeats the two fire geists.

Art by Jana Shirmer & Johannes Voss

Divide an additional 1,000 XP equally among the
characters if the party puts the spirits to rest.

Corpse Wagons

Run this encounter only if the adventurers have been
following the zombie horde’s tracks.
While the horde’s tracks move south away from Mauer
Estate, some wagon tracks are spotted moving north,
back toward the estate. These are the wagons that were
filled with corpses and sent back to Siegfried.
As the adventurers follow the tracks, they come across
one of these wooden corpse wagons sitting in their path.
The wagon is filled with corpses. The four zombies that
were pulling the wagon are found on the ground just in
front of it. They have been cut down neatly into a pile of
body parts. A DC 10 Intelligence (Investigation) check
while observing the bodies notes that they were cut down
with clean, precise cuts from a sharp weapon, possibly
a sword. Additionally, characters can spot new footprints
near the zombies: human bootprints, two pairs. A DC
15 Intelligence (Investigation) check notes that these
boots are plate greaves, part of a set of plate armor. The
bootprints appeared a few paces from the zombies and
approached them; there’s signs of brief struggle, then the
bootprints walked a few paces and mysteriously vanish.
In truth, this was the work of vampires. House Falkenrath
has become worried about Siegfried’s activities. When
they found out that the necro-alchemist was collecting
bodies, they sent some of their kin to intercept the corpse
wagons to deprive Siegfried of supplies. These two

45

vampires landed at the wagon, quickly dispatched of the
zombies pulling it, and then flew away.
If the adventurers continue following the zombie horde’s
tracks for another hour, they come to a second wagon just
as the zombies escorting it are being cut down. Hans
and Franz, two vampire spawn warriors (APPENDIX B)
(PICTURE), quickly dispatch the zombies with little effort.

As you continue walking, you spot the hazy form of a
wagon about three hundred feet away at the mist’s edge. It
is slowly moving north, being pulled by three humanoids.
Suddenly, two humanoids with large pale wings appear in
the sky above, plunging through the mist to the wagon.
There are brief sounds of a commotion; staggered groans,
then silence again.
The vampires linger beside the wagon for a few minutes
to chat. Hans complains about their assignment, saying
this is grunt work, that his new boots are caked in mud,
the bog reeks, and that there’s a small hamlet not far from
here they can stop by to “get a bite to eat.” Franz scolds
Hans, telling him to take the assignment seriously and
stop complaining, that he needs to exercise more and
isn’t “pumped up” enough.
If the adventurers do not approach or are not spotted,
the two vampires fly away after a few minutes.
If the vampires notice the adventurers and aren’t
immediately attacked, they try to strike up conversation:

The two figures turn to you. Both wear fine red silken
clothes under their armor; red enameled plate with gold
trim. Both have strange, wondrous eyes, golden irisis
swimming in pools of black sclera. Their pale faces wear
very different expressions: one man a cold grimace, the
other man a haughty smirk.
“It seems we have company, Franz,” the man says, “a
band of seasoned looking fellows, heading north... oh! You
must be the ‘Heroes of Shadowgrange!’ Such an honor!”
he says, performing a mock bow.
Hans wants to banter with the adventurers, as he’s bored
and looking for entertainment. Franz, however, is a nononsense kind of vampire and wants to finish taking out
the corpse wagons so that they can head home.
Franz is tight-lipped when dealing with the adventurers,
while Hans does entertain questions, albeit with mocking
sarcasm. For example, if asked what the vampires are
doing here, he replies, “taking a stroll, of course. The
farbog is lovely this time of year.” He does congratulate
the adventurers, however, saying that the Falkenraths
are happy they aided Shadowgrange and “protected the
cattle.” The vampires are just as opposed to the zombie
horde -- and Siegfried’s other machinations -- as everyone

46
Chapter 4: Into the Farbog

is, because the vampires rely on healthy, thriving human
settlements as food.
If asked to help defeat Siegfried, Hans explains that
the alchemist is holed up in the Mauer Estate and that
the building has a protective holy ward that prevents the
vampires from attacking directly. He is willing to help the
adventurers if they deal with Siegfried for the vampires;
for example, he’s willing to find out what happened to
Katarina and relay that information to them, after the
estate’s holy wards are taken down.
The vampires defend themselves if attacked or provoked
enough, but they are under strict orders not to kill the
characters, a fact that Franz must remind Hans. The
Falkenrath know of the adventurers’ quest and would like
to see the party do the dirty work of disposing Siegfried for
them. If one vampire is killed, the other attempts to flee,
swearing revenge (maybe returning with other vampires
to attack the party in a future adventure).

Awarding Experience Points

Divide 1,050 XP equally among the characters if the party
speaks with the vampires. If they manage to defeat the
vampires, divide 3,600 XP instead.

Conclusion of Part 4

On the end of the second day of travel, the party reaches
the end of the swamp.

You leave the black muck of the farbog behind and are
greeted with a fresh breeze to the open valley ahead of
you. Soft rolling hills cascade ahead of you, flanked by the
jagged stone valley walls.
Up a few miles ahead is a grove of greenery rising up
from the short grass. Poking up from its center, high above
the forest ceiling, is a twisting stone tower adorned by
glistening metal contraptions. The tower shimmers with
wisps of pale lights, like ribbons dancing in the breeze.
Angry dark clouds gather over the valley. They seem
to concentrate over the grove, as if nature’s wrath was
winding up to smite the tower. Quick flashes of lightning
pop from inside the restless clouds. A storm is coming...
The adventurers have nearly reached the end of their
journey: Mauer Estate stands defiantly in front of them.
They need only cross the valley, descend into the thicket’s
center, and enter.

Awarding Experience Points

Crossing the farbog completes a story milestone. Divide
1,200 XP equally among the characters.
There is no milestone level up for this Chapter.

Art by John Stanko

Chapter 5: The Perfect Storm
Sixty miles north of Shadowgrange, nestled in a clearing at
the center of a grove of live oak trees deep within northern
Stensia, stands Mauer Estate. The mansion is one of the
oldest buildings in the region, its foundation dating back
thousands of years to a holy sect of paladins that brought
the Light to Innistrad long before even Avacyn. Since then,
countless occupants have claimed Mauer Estate as their
home, modifying the grounds to suit their needs.
Siegfried is the estate’s current owner and uses it as
his base of operations. Ever since he fled Shadowgrange
in the wake of his beloved Katarina’s kidnapping (see
“Background” in Introduction), the alchemist spends his
days here working tirelessly to carry out his goal of revenge.
Siegfried descent into madness has attracted demons to
his cause. The fiends aid in his work and whisper dark
secrets that further taint his warped psyche.
A great storm brews overhead: part of Siegfried’s
machinations, in fact. The mad alchemist seeks to harness
the storm’s power to bring his ultimate creation to life.

The adventurers have a chance to confront Siegfried and
put a stop to his nefarious schemes. And of course, untold
riches await those brave enough to explore the ancient
areas hidden deep inside the estate.

The Grove

Mauer Estate’s grove is nestled deep within the farbog.
The small forest is comprised of a half mile radius of oak
trees (PICTURE). The trees’ thick sprawling branches
intertwine with their neighbors, obscuring vision and
making it difficult to navigate through the area.
The oak trees are littered with what look like normal
wood knots at a distance, but closer inspection shows
these lumps are all have human shapes -- agonized faces,
outstretched hands -- as if people were trapped inside
the bark. Destroying the lumps only finds ordinary wood,
however.
The telltale signs of the zombie horde’s trek -- hundreds

47
Chapter 5: The Perfect Storm

of footprints and wagon wheels -- lead from the grove
south to the swamp. Adventurers can easily track them
north to the grove’s main entrance, a path carved through
the trees specifically to allow the horde to pass through.
The branches and trees that were in the path’s way were
smashed and splintered by skaab abominations and the
debris tossed to the side.
The adventurers don’t need to follow the main path
into the grove; they are free to enter the grove from any
direction. However, the main path is the only method of
traveling unimpeded through the grove: walking through
from anywhere else requires navigating up and around
the twisting jungle of low-hanging live oak branches.

Lady of the Woods

The adventurers attract the curiosity of Eudora, a dryad
(MM p121) (PICTURE) living in the grove. Eudora casts
pass without trace before following the party sneakily.

As you make your way through the grove, you hear youthful
feminine voice whisper in your ear, “My my, what do we
have here? I rarely have living visitors in my woods. Who
are you, and why have you come?” Out of the corner of
your eyes you catch a glimpse of a feminine form flitting
through the trees before its gone again with only warm
laughter hanging in the air.
While Eudora probes the characters for information, the
dryad uses her tree stride to keep a distance from the
adventurers and ducks into hiding when she’s out of
sight, using her +15 Dexterity (Stealth).
If the adventurers explain why they are here and she is
convinced that they mean her no harm, she reveals herself
to them. Eudora appears as a statuesque beauty, youthful
and alluring. Her hair and tight-fitting dress are made of
autumn leaves: vibrant fiery hues of yellow, orange, and
red. The dryad radiates vigor and primal magic.

Hippie Personality

Eudora is a social creature that has been deprived of
humanoid companions for a long time. Because of this,
she is utterly delighted to have an opportunity to speak
with friendly adventurers.
The dryad places a great deal of importance on good
emotions. She wants to make sure everyone is feeling
“good vibes,” and advocates decision making to “follow
your heart” instead of cold, rational logic.
If any character is visibly upset, or if there is any fighting
amongst the group, Eudora tries to intervene in mediate,
asking what is wrong, and what are the deeper issues at
play. Was the character abused as a child? Did they have
a good relationship with their parents? The dryad loves

48
Chapter 5: The Perfect Storm

taking the role of a therapist and mediator.

What the Dryad Knows

Eudora has never left the grove and knows little of the
outside world. She doesn’t know anything about current
events, though she is not a fan of Avacyn due to the
archangel’s persecution of druidism and “the old ways”
connected to the forest.
If asked about Siegfried, Eudora tells them that she
helped a grief-stricken man make it to Mauer Estate (fed
him goodberries and let him rest), that he would’ve been
beautiful if his soul wasn’t wracked with anger and sadness.
The dryad regrets helping him, as the alchemist has been
working day and night producing undead monstrosities,
abominations and mockeries of nature. His foul work only
causes ruin and misery.
If asked about the human-like lumps in the oak trees,
Eudora explains that long ago, when Avacyn arrived, the
“people of the forest” rejected her and her new religion,
preferring to stick to the old ways. Avacyn punished them
for this.

Eudora’s Offer

The dryad explains that she is lonely. Long ago, when the
grove stretched all the way to the swamp, humans used
to live in harmony with nature. In those times she had
many visitors, many intimate friends. But slowly the forest
receded and the world filled with darkness, and she was
left here alone. What the dryad wants the most is a taste
of that intimacy she enjoyed so long ago.
Having no love for the alchemist in Mauer Estate and
his foul projects, Euroda offers to help the adventurers.
She knows of a secret path that leads inside the mansion.
But she wants something in return: each adventurer must
stand up in front of the group and reveal an intimate
secret about themselves that no one else in the group
knows. Eudora explains that her most cherished moments
with her intimate friends was when they left themselves
emotionally open and vulnerable to others as an ultimate
act of trust, and she wants to taste that experience one
more time. The dryad warns that if any of them refuse her
offer or lie, she will not show them the hidden passage.
This is a fun opportunity for roleplaying. It gives each
character a spotlight to flesh out their characters and
give the group a mutual understanding of one another.
The intimate secret can be something silly, like a fear
of butterflies, or more serious, like the characters’
motivations for adventuring.
Eudora conducts the event like a group therapy meeting:
she leads the group, asking each character in turn to share
their story. She is polite and strives to keep the group a
safe and calm environment, thanking each one for sharing

and taking her time to relish the experience. For example,
if she particularly enjoys a story, she may close her eyes,
take a deep breath, and smile as she exhales. “That felt
true. I felt it, right here,” pointing to where a human’s
heart would be.

Developments

If each character reveals an intimate secret to the dryad’s
satisfaction, or if they manage to convincingly pass off a
fake tale as true, then Eudora leads them to a large live
oak tree. The dryad utters a simple spell and the tree
partially uproots itself, revealing a tunnel underneath: this
tunnel leads to the kitchen (area A6) in Mauer Estate. The
earthen tunnel is roughly dug but stable; there is no light,
and the roots of the trees above dangle from its ceiling.
Eudora cannot accompany the adventurers into Mauer
Estate. The dryad explains that she is magically bound
to the grove and cannot leave its boundaries. The forest
clearing which the estate resides is so filled with twisted
magic that it’s severed from nature, making her unable
to enter it. If the adventurers make a good impression on
her, however, she casts goodberry three times and gives
them the berries for their journey, wishing them good luck.
If attacked, Eudora flees, using tree stride to help her
escape. She would much rather flee than fight.

Awarding Experience Points

Divide 1,500 XP equally among the characters if the party
reveals their intimate secrets.

Mauer Estate

Looking around the Estate, the players hear/see:

You hear the sounds of shoveling up ahead. Circling the
estate’s perimeter are humanoids shoveling the muddy
earth in awkward jerky movement, sending mud flying to
the side. Torn bits of muddy rags cling to their wet rotting
bodies.
20 zombies (MM p316) surround the mansion, using
shovels to dig a shallow trench that circles the entire
building. Siegfried commanded the trench be dug for a
future project to fortify his base of operations. The zombies
are focused on their task, so much that adventurers could
walk past them without any reaction from the undead.
Attacking a zombie draws their attention, however,
and 1d6+3 nearby zombies shamble over to attack the
adventurers. If they lose sight of the adventurers, for
example of the characters flee into the woods, then the
zombies return to their work.
The main features of Mauer Estate that adventurers can
reasonably spot in the heavy rain are:
•
•
•
•

If the adventurers trek to the center of the grove they
eventually reach a clearing where Mauer Estate resides.
The storm above them begins in earnest, pouring down
heavy rain and periodically striking the rooftop with
lightning. (PICTURE) (MAP)

A cold rain begins pouring down as you reach the forest
clearing. The heavy rainfall obscures your vision; angry gray
storm clouds foaming overhead acts as a thick curtain,
blocking light and leaving the clearing in a grim shadow.
Leering down at you from the center of the clearing is the
manor-house: Mauer Estate. Twisting up from the center
of the rooftop is a stone tower, its flat ceiling crowded with
a messy array of metal instrument of various shapes and
sizes. Shimmering ribbons of soft pale light hang in the
air surrounding the tower.
An explosive flash of lightning slams down upon a
large metallic sphere atop the tower and is immediately
followed by the boom of thunder. Electricity dances upon
the metal apparatus and skips down long tubes attached
to it that descends into the tower.

•

A pair of towering silvery doors on the southern side
of the mansion: the main entrance (A1)
The stables, a smaller, open building attached to the
eastern wall of the estate estate (A7)
Wooden double doors on the north side of the estate
leading down into the cellar (A8)
A DC 13 Wisdom (Perception) check notes two
marble statues standing in alcoves flanking the main
entrance. The statues are female angels in silken
gowns covering their faces with their hands as they
weep, the rain washing down their faces like tears. A
DC 10 Intelligence (Religion) recognizes these statues
as portraying angels of the flight alabaster, protectors
of humans both living and dead. (These are manor
gargoyles; see “Climbing the Walls” below)
A DC 10 Wisdom (Perception) check spots a stained
glass window above the main entrance. It depicts an
emblem with a pouncing lion. A DC 15 Intelligence
(History) recognizes as the emblem of the House
Lowe, an ancient family of nobles that was wiped out
long ago by the neighboring vampire families.

Entering the Estate

There are four main ways of entering the estate:
• Go through the mansion’s front door (A1)
• Entering through the door connected to the stables
(A7)
• Adventurers entering the estate from Eudora’s secret
passage (see “Lady of the Woods”) find themselves in

49
Chapter 5: The Perfect Storm

Map by Sean Ellison

•

the kitchen (A6).
Climb up to the rooftop and enter the laboratory (A10)
through an open hatch (see “Climbing the Walls”).

Of course, creative adventurers may find other methods
of entrance; roll with their zany ideas when possible!

Climbing the Walls

Unorthodox adventurers may attempt to scale the walls.
Climbing the rain-slicked walls in the dark is difficult even
for trained climbers, requiring a DC 20 Strength (Athletics)
check.
Adventurers attempting to climb also attract the
attention of the 2 manor gargoyles (MM p140) disguised
as angelic statues. They wait until the last adventurers
begin their ascent before striking.

A shriek pierces the hiss of the driving rain. Swooping
down at you on outstretched wings are two angelic figures
with marble-like surfaces. Their statuesque feminine
bodies are a stark contrast to their fiendish faces; small
mischievous eyes stare at you behind a squished snout
and rows of razor-sharp teeth. They make pig-like squeals
and snorts as they cackle and close in on you.
In addition to their claws and bite, the gargoyles may try
to drop climbers off the wall. They do so by grappling the
target (action), moving away from the wall with them

50
Chapter 5: The Perfect Storm

(move at half speed), and dropping them (free action).
The gargoyles flee if taken below 20 hit points or if one of
them is destroyed.
It’s nearly impossible to climb into the second floor
windows; the windows are all blocked with stone and
plaster. In fact, most of the second floor has been filled
with earth and stone; Siegfried did away with unnecessary
space, denying extra methods for would-be intruders to
access his lair.
There are, however, three available ways that climbing
adventurers can enter the mansion. The first is by
smashing through the stained glass window into the main
hall (A2). The second is going down the chimney leading
to the dining hall’s fireplace (A5). The third is climbing to
the peak of the estate, the top of the alchemy lab (A10),
where they can enter through an open ceiling hatch.
Lightning Strikes. Traversing the top of the tower is
highly dangerous: lightning frequently strikes the metal
apparatuses. As an adventurer climbs over, roll 1d6; on
a 6, lightning strikes the top of the tower. Adventurers
caught in the blast must make a DC 15 Dexterity save,
taking 8d6 lightning damage on a failed save, or half as
much damage on a success.

Ward of Radiance

Ribbons of pale light, like a miniature version of the
Northern Lights, surround the tower as well. These lights
are projections of pure radiant energy. Climbers in close

proximity to these lights may feel an uncomfortable
warmth coming from inside of them or restless energy,
but nothing debilitating. Fiends and undead, however,
feel a searing pain when close to these lights, taking 1d6
radiant damage per turn and must make a DC 15 Wisdom
save or be frightened for 1 minute.

Area A1 - The Great Doors

A pair of towering silvery doors act as the main entrance
into the manse, leading to the main hall (area A2). Their
shining silvery surfaces act as two great mirrors that show
the reflection of anyone approaching.
As the adventurers approach the doors they hear a
booming voice that asks them the following riddle:
Always running
Never walking
Sometimes babbles
But never talking
What am I?
(The answer is a river.)
Alternatively, replace this riddle with any other that you’d
like, or a different puzzle entirely. Or, if you’re not fond of
riddles/puzzles at all, the doors can ask for a password, or
state of intent, before allowing entry.
If the adventurers do not answer to the door’s
satisfaction, they do not open. Any attempt to force
the doors open causes the doors -- which are actually 2
mimics (MM p220) -- to attack.

The two silvery doors suddenly fly out of the door frame
towards you. Their flat surfaces quickly stretch and warp
into giant gaping maws with long, powerful tongues
curling back as if readying itself to swat at you.
In combat, the mimics attack with their pseudopod
“tongue.” Once the target is grappled, the mimic reels in
the target for a vicious bite (attacks with advantage due
to its Grappler trait). The mimics have been tasked with
guarding the entrance and fight to the death, but do not
chase fleeing adventurers outside of the grove clearing.

Awarding Experience Points

Divide 900 XP equally among the characters if the party
answers the riddle or defeats the mimics.

Area A2 - Main Hall

The main hall can be accessed by passing through the
great doors (A1), the west parlor (A3), the dining hall
(A4), or smashing through the stained glass windows
(see “Climbing the Walls”).

The ruinous remains of fine marble pillars line the hallway
here; some toppled over, others reaching up to the vaulted
ceiling but coming short of the top. Hollow suits of armor
are on display along the wall, standing vigil with their
hollow gauntlets wrapped around ceremonial blades.
Bursting through the center of the hall is a cylindrical
stone tower. Only a portion of the tower is contained in
this hallway: its wall extends beyond the main hall, and it
ascends beyond the ceiling.
High above, rain courses in dark rivulets down the
stained glass windows above the main doorway. In the
crash of lightning, the stained glass casts the chamber in
flashes of red and violet.
Paired doors stand to your left and right. Across the
hall, a shiny brass door offers a way inside the tower.
The door to the left leads to the west parlor (A3), the door
to the right leads to the dining hall (A5), and finally up
ahead leads into the tower’s staircase (A9).
Each step causes the old eroding wooden floor to creak
ominously. Six suits of armor on display have engravings
of moon motifs and of soaring herons. They are rusted and
are littered with dust and cobwebs. Three of the suits of
armor on display are in fact haunted guardians: animated
armors (MM p19) (PICTURE) holding flying swords
(MM p20); they are indistinguishable from mundane
items unless a character can detect magic. Siegfried cast
prestidigitation to make them look old and unused.
A character investigating the brass doorway into the
tower notices a small nearly invisible message on the
door. A DC 15 Intelligence (Arcana) check recognizes this
as a glyph of warding spell, but not what type. The font
is tiny and requires getting close to read it. The message
says, “read this out loud.”

Shouldn’t Have Done That

If a character says the message out loud, it triggers the
explosive runes, releasing a 20-foot radius explosion of
electricity from the glyph. Each creature caught in the
explosion must make a DC 14 Dexterity saving throw,
taking 3d8 lightning damage on a failed saving throw or
half as much damage on a successful one.
If the explosive runes are triggered or dispelled, the 3
animated armors holding 3 flying swords immediately
come to life and attack the party, fighting until destroyed.

Developments

Unless the party is deliberately being quiet, the vampire
Lambert hears them. He uses his scroll of disguise self
to look like a human cathar and begins shouting for help
from inside the west parlor (A3).

51
Chapter 5: The Perfect Storm

Awarding Experience Points

Divide 800 XP equally among the characters if the party
defeats the animated armors and flying swords.

Area A3 - West Parlor

The west parlor is connected to the main hall (A2).

Decades of neglect has deteriorated what was once a
cheerful parlor. Baby-blue walls hold the slashed and torn
remnants of old family portraits.
Elegant chairs with poofy cushions
surround a small wooden circular
table, engravings of majestic
stags run laps along its edges. A
bookcase cover the western wall.
Lambert Spinne, a vampire warrior
(APPENDIX B), resides in this
small room.

unbroken line of silver powder on the ground under the
doorway. He hurries them in an anxious voice to wipe
away the line of powder so that he can escape.
The powdered silver radiates an aura of magic
(abjuration). Inquisitive characters can make a DC 15
Intelligence (Arcana) or (Religion) check to recognize the
line of powdered silver as a magic circle against evil. The
magic circle binds Lambert; he cannot cross the line’s
boundary until the line is broken, nor can he disturb the
line himself.
Anyone other than the vampire
can dispel the magic circle
by simply breaking the line of
powdered silver, for example
sweeping it away with their foot.

Lambert’s True Self

If they catch Lambert unaware,
see through his illusion, or the
vampire spawn drops his disguise
self spell, they instead see a
Illusions and Trickery
gaunt, pale-skinned man in fine
If the PCs made a commotion
aristocratic clothing that looks
either by fighting the mimics at the
straight out of a Victorian nobel’s
entrance (A1) or make noise inside
wardrobe: a vest of red and gold,
the main hall (A2), Lambert uses
high black leather boots, a black
one of his scrolls of disguise self
high-collared cape that is red on
to take the appearance of a human
the inside. Lambert’s striking
cathar before calling out for help. If
eyes; golden irises in a pool of
this happens and the adventurers
black sclera, are a telltale sign
open the door, and if they have a
of vampirism, glinting in the
light source, read or paraphrase:
darkness like a cat’s. (PICTURE)
Like most vampires, Lambert
Standing inside the room is a man
has a smug sense of superiority
Art byJames Ryman
that appears to be in his mid 30’s.
over mortals, which he compares
He is decked head to toe in the studded leathers of a
his own kind as “shepherds watching over our sheep.”
combat-ready cathar, a mix of white and brown, topped
He acts with restraint towards the characters, which he
with a leather tri-corner hat.
respects to some degree for making it this far. He watches
“Thank Avacyn, someone has come! Please, help! The
them with curiosity and amusement.
madman owner of this house has kept me prisoner here,
says he plans to experiment on me. Please, before his foul
Interview With The Vampire
minions arrive!”
If the adventurers don’t fall for his ruse, Lambert changes
tactics. Instead of relying on the characters’ good will, he
Lambert speaks the truth: Siegfried is indeed keeping
entices them with money, power, and information. He
him prisoner for future experiments. He’s certainly
explains that he is from a very rich and influential family,
withholding information, however. If questioned, the
the Voldaren vampires. Lambert guarantees that the
vampire disguised as a cathar keeps repeating that he’ll
characters will be handsomely rewarded if they free him.
explain everything once he’s free, that they must hurry
If the characters are willing to negotiate his release for
before patrols come.
information, wealth, or power, Lambert has one request:
step into his parlor. A character (one or more) has to sit
Trapped
down at the table with him during the talks as a sign of
The vampire explains what is keeping him here: it is not a
good faith. He gives his word that he will not harm anyone
physical barrier, but a magical one. He points to a straight

52
Chapter 5: The Perfect Storm

that enters the room so long as they do not attack him.

What Lambert Knows

Lambert is willing to barter information for his release. He
has only been a vampire for two years now and does not
know any secrets that would be left for Voldaren elders,
but he can readily answer any general questions about
Stensia and Innistrad that an average citizen would know.
In addition, he has juicy bits of information that the
characters may be interested in:
• He participated in Katarina’s abduction (see
“Voldaren’s Lesson” in the Introduction) and her
subsequent “crowning” as a mock “Queen of the
Vampires,” but was not permitted to feast on her at
the celebrations’ end, “unfortunately there’s only so
much blood to go around.”
• The vampire families were disturbed when they found
out about the zombie horde laying waste to the
countryside. They followed the corpse wagons (and
destroyed the zombies pulling them) back to Mauer
Estate
• Lambert was sent to spy on Siegfried, but the Estate
is incredibly well protected against vampires: he
specifically mentions the strange aura of radiant
energy surrounding the tower which “seared my flesh
as I approached”
• The vampire was eventually caught by Siegfried and is
now kept here for future experiments

Developments

If Lambert tricks the adventurers into breaking the magic
circle against evil with his disguise, keeps up his act long
enough for him to break from the party and escape. He
isn’t looking for a fight, instead hoping to return home as
quickly as possible.
If the adventurers see through his ruse and agree to
negotiate for his release by entering his room, Lambert
keeps his word of not harming them. He can promise
them riches for his release, within reason -- treat his
promised riches as a Treasure Horde CR 5 (DMG p137) to
see what he can and cannot give. If they agree on a price
and free the vampire, a week later a package arrives to the
characters with the promised items.
Or he can promise a favor from his brethren: what that
favor ends up being is up to you. For example, he could
put in a good word towards the vampire elders, should
any character wish to become “gifted” with vampirism.
Other favors could be free passage alongside Voldaren’s
territories, or a promise not to feast on people living in a
specific village for a full year.
If the characters refuse to release him, the vampire
shouts insults at them as they leave, warning them that

when he is freed he and his brethren will hunt the party
down and devour them for their insolence. He may show
up in the future with a few vampires to attack the party.
If pressed into combat, Lambert’s only hope is to fight
them inside his room, as the vampire has no ranged
capabilities. But he can get out of line of sight easily,
hiding in corners of the room so that anyone looking to
attack him would have to enter to get a clear shot.

Secret Room

The bookcase is filled with books ranging from a variety
of topics, including history, biology, geography, etc. A
DC 13 Intelligence (Investigation) both reveals a sliding
mechanism around the bookcase and that one book,
“Camoflage and Its Practical Applications,” stands out
amongst the rest. Pulling on the book swings the bookcase
open, revealing a hidden room (A4).

Awarding Experience Points

Divide 1,800 XP equally among the characters if the speaks
with and/or destroys Lambert.

Treasure

The vampire was stripped of most notable possessions,
but he managed to keep two scrolls of disguise self hidden
inside his boots.
Most of the dusty tomes on the bookcase are valuable
(10-30gp each), but two are particularly noteworthy:
The Sacred Waters of Sumnerryl, describes the location
of an ancient sinkhole hidden away in province Kessig
whose waters are rumored to contain mystical powers. It
would be worth 150gp to the druids of Kessig, plus could
be a hook for a future adventure.
Fall From Glory is actually a hollowed out book holding
a golden hourglass. The “sand” of the hourglass is
powdered ruby. The hourglass is worth 400gp to the right
(extremely wealthy) buyer.

Area A4 - Hidden Room

This room is accessed via a secret doorway in the parlor
(A3). None of Mauer Estate’s current inhabitants know
about this room, making it the perfect spot for adventurers
to rest. A lever on a wall inside the room opens and closes
the secret entrance.

A font bubbles in the middle this small room, its silver
liquid sparkling with fair dawn’s light. Encircling its broad
base is a mosaic depicting a silver heron and a dark
fiendish goat in eternal chase. An inscription is written on
the font’s rim.

Font of Bennu
53
Chapter 5: The Perfect Storm

This blessed font is said to grant knowledge through visions
to those who partake without avarice. The inscription
on the font’s rim reads in Celestial, “A blessing for the
righteous; a curse for avarice.” Anyone who drinks from
the font experiences a vision of the past and potentially
the future. The imbiber gains a bit of magical potential,
whose benefit that character can activate at a time of their
choosing. Once activated, the benefit is expended.
A character who drinks from the fountain more than
once is afflicted with the disfavor of Bennu. The character
does not receive the font’s benefit, instead gaining a level
of exhaustion.
When a character drinks from the font for the first
time, roll 1d4 and consult the following list. You can also
improvise or create specific visions, perhaps revealing
additional story information that hints at future adventures
beyond this one.
1. Vision of Sacrifice: The character witnesses a massive
black rupture in the sky, fiends and other horrors emerging
from it. A glowing heron flies into the portal and erupts
into a mist of silver. There is a blinding flash of light which
then dims to reveal the silver moon of Innistrad.
Benefit: As a reaction, the character can claim this
benefit when an ally they can see within 30 feet of them
takes damage, taking that damage instead and negating
half of it.
2. Vision of Past Valor: The characters witness a scene
of Avacyn fighting with an equally powerful demon
(Griselbrand), the Helvault standing in the background.
Benefit: As a free action, the character can claim this
benefit to take an additional bonus action.
3. Vision of Inspiration: This vision shows the Church
of Avacyn at the height of its power, humans and angels
working together to drive the horrors away from their
lands.
Benefit: As a free action, the character can claim this
benefit to gain an inspiration point.
4. Vision of Future Glory: This vision shows a huge silver
mass (the Helvault) standing at the center of a garden.
The object explodes with a flash of radiance and an army
of devils stream out.
Benefit: As a free action, the character can claim this
benefit to gain an additional Dash action.

Area A5 - Dining Hall

A vaulted hall stretches before you, anchored by a great
stone fireplace on one end and a wall decked in old
ceremonial swords on the other. Between them are three
long tables capable of seating an entire company. Rotting
body parts are heaped on the tables in great hideous piles:
arms, legs, heads, and other parts. Old wooden bowls,

54
Chapter 5: The Perfect Storm

drinking horns, and knives are strewn about the floor
mixed in with debris.
The stone tower at the center of the manse cuts a swath
into this hall, jutting out of a corner. A dumbwaiter has
been built into the tower, its metal cart suspended by thick
ropes.
The dining hall can be accessed by the main hall (A2), the
kitchen (A6), or through the fireplace (see “Climbing the
Walls”).
The corpses littering the tables have been brought
here from the corpse wagons sitting in the stables (A6).
Shilgengar, the demonlord of ashmouth (Appendix B) and
his five crawling claw helpers (MM p44) work here day
and night. They chop up the corpses into body parts and
sort them into piles (head, arms, legs, torso, hands, feet)
on the tables.
The shaft on the tower wall is a dumbwaiter: it leads
from the dining hall to the top of the tower (A10) where
Siegfried works. Periodically, a quasit from the top of the
tower (A10) calls down the shaft of the dumbwaiter for a
specific body part. Shilgengar and his helpers fill the cart
with the body part, then the demon turns a crank that lifts
the cart up to the tower with ropes on pulleys.
Shilgengar has been commanded by a powerful
archdemon to aid Siegfried with his projects and push
him further towards utter madness. While the taskmaster
has been overseeing supplying Siegfried with body parts,
his accomplice, the quasit Qarr (A10), whispers fiendish
suggestions in the stitcher’s ear.
Shilgengar relishes the chance to inflict pain on any
invaders. If taken below 20 hit points, the demon tries
to retreat, ideally by flying up the dumbwaiter shaft and
warning Siegfried (A10). If killed, the demonlord’s essence
dissolves and reforms inside the pits of ashmouth
months or years later, ready to enact his vengeance on the
adventurers.

Going Up The Dumbwaiter

A crank operates the dumbwaiter, raising or lowering the
metal crate inside the shaft. Turning the crank requires a
Strength check: the DC is 5 for an empty crate, up to 15
when it’s at maximum capacity. An adventurer can operate
the crank while the rest of the party is in the crate to send
them up the shaft.
Alternatively, adventurers can climb up the shaft.
Climbing the thick ropes attached to the crate requires
at DC 10 Strength check. They can also climb the walls,
but the smooth surface makes it difficult to find grips,
requiring a DC 15 Strength check. Failure by 5 or more
means the character loses grip and falls.
The dumbwaiter goes up 50 feet to the top of the tower,
the alchemist’s lab (A10).

Art by Dan Scott

Awarding
Points

Experience

Divide 1,850 XP equally among the
characters if the party destroys the
barlgura and the five crawling claws.

Treasure

If defeated, adventurers can pick up
the butcher’s cleaver (APPENDIX A)
left on one of the tables.
The corpses thrown into this room
weren’t thoroughly searched. A
diligent investigation of the corpses
finds two platinum rings (75gp
each); a pouch containing 15 cp,
13 ep, and a potion of vitality; and a
disembodied hand clutching a wand
of magic missiles.

Area A6 - Kitchen

Adventurers can enter the kitchen either through the
dining hall (A5) or through Eudora’s secret tunnel, (see
“Lady of the Woods”) which leads to a hidden doorway
behind a cabinet in the kitchen.
Four charmbreaker devils (APPENDIX B) (PICTURE)
in this kitchen are currently having a crisis: Shilgengar,
the demonic taskmaster in the adjacent dining hall (A5)
has demanded that they cook him a meal. The fiend has
not been pleased with the devils’ disastrous attempts at
cooking and threatens to annihilate them if they do not
satisfy him with their next dish.
Unless the adventurers were exceptionally loud in an
adjacent room, for example casting thunderwave, the
fiends here are so preoccupied smashing things that they
don’t hear even the sounds of battle.
As the adventurers approach the kitchen, they hear:

You hear a commotion coming from beyond the door:
ceramics shattering, metal plates clanging on the stone
floor, and anxious guttural shrieks and barks of multiple
creatures.
Characters that understand the Abyssal language can
make out what the shrieks and barks are saying: “We need
more of the green sauce!” “What about more shoe?” “I
don’t know!” “This is hopeless! Shilgengar is gonna kill
us!” “We don’t even have taste buds, for Grazz’t’s sake!”
If they look inside the kitchen:

You see four humanoid creatures leaping around a kitchen.

Their sinewy red bodies are armored by wicked chitinous
spikes that adorn their body, from the back-swept horns
on their head to their long prehensile tails. They frantically
rummage through dusty cabinets and shelves, carelessly
knocking pots and plates over as though searching for
something in particular.

Iron Chef

When the charmbreaker devils spot the adventurers, they
quickly try to bargain with them before the adventurers
attack:

“Wait!” One of the devils speaks to you in broken Common,
“you help us, we help you! Yes? You cook, yes?”
If the adventurers are willing to listen, the devils explain
their situation trying to cook for Shilgengar. If the
characters help them cook a good meal, the devils will
spike the meal with a potion of sleep, which will put the
taskmaster into a deep sleep. This arrangement would
benefit both parties: the PCs can walk past Shilgengar
undisturbed, while the charmbreaker devils get a muchneeded break from cooking.
The kitchen has a wide array of ingredients that range
from reasonable to awful: ripe apples, a human hand, a
worn-out shoe, cinnamon, vials of newt spittle, a rabbit,
a hag’s eye, ground pepper, a barrel filled with red wine,
and anything else you want to add. The devils have a stew
heating over a wood-burning stove that has the shoe
floating in water.
Should they take the devils’ offer, the adventurers must
cook a meal out of the ingredients. The devils have no

55
Chapter 5: The Perfect Storm

taste buds but will nonetheless attempt to help: “What
about more shoe?” “Ew, apples? They don’t have any
blood in them!” “Lemme give you a hand (waving around
the human hand)”
The adventurer’s end of the bargain is fulfilled once
they’ve tasted the finished meal and convince the devils
that it is tasty. Characters that lie about the food’s taste
must make a Charisma (Deception) check opposed to the
fiends’ Wisdom (Insight) so the devils don’t catch them
on it.

Developments

If the party fulfills their end of the deal, the devils spike the
food and drink with a potion of sleep before heading up to
present the meal to Shilgengar. If the food is acceptable,
the demonlord quickly consumes all of it and promptly
goes to sleep. If unhappy with the food, however,
Shilgengar enters a horrible rage and attacks the devils,
which cause them to try and flee.
The charmbreaker devils defend themselves if the
adventurers attack, giving up on attempts to bargain.
If two devils are killed, the remaining devils attempt to
flee into the dining hall (A5) and inform Shilgengar of
intruders, joining him in battle.

Area A7 - Stables

The open-air stables are attached to the eastern wall of
Mauer Estate. The corpse wagons brought back from the
zombie horde are found here, most of them now empty.
Four zombies (MM p311) are hauling the last corpses
from the wagons into the estate through adjacent double
doors into the dining hall (A5), dumping them on the
floor for Ugbug and his helpers to sort out.
Like the other zombies outside, they are totally
indifferent to the characters unless attacked. Adventurers
can enter the dining hall from here without any hassle.

Treasure

Amongst the leftovers in the wagons are three diamonds
hidden in dirty rags (100 gp each); a potion of flying in a
stoppered vial inside a corpse’s pant pocket; and 23 gp
and 35 sp scattered atop the wagons.

Area A8 - Cellar

The cellar’s entrance juts out from the north wall of the
estate. Wooden double doors lead down underneath the
mansion.

A short flight of stone steps leads down into the cellar
floor. Guttering torchlight casts long shadows on the
arched stone ceiling. The east and west walls are lined

56
Chapter 5: The Perfect Storm

with five-foot-wide cells, each sealed with an iron barred
door and fitted with a nasty heap of straw.
The central region of the room is a well-stocked torture
chamber. Chains and ropes hang from a tangle of pulleys
and hooks set in the ceiling, some ending in manacles
and others in clamps or cruel hooks of their own. A rack
and an iron maiden round out the chamber’s morbid
furnishings.
On the southern wall, blocked by kegs and barrels, is
a large wooden door reinforced and barred with thick
iron. An eerie purple light seeps through the cracks and
crevices of the door.
This chamber is where Siegfried keeps most of his
prisoners for interrogation and future experiments. If any
characters is captured in Mauer Estate, they eventually end
up naked and imprisoned in one of these cells. Adding a
prisoner NPC that has ties to a future adventure you have
planned can be a great hook to move from this story to
the next.
A bearded devil (MM p70) named Terilanyx and a lemure
(MM p76) named “Nattdaymon” -- the only gibberish
“word” it can say -- sit on a pile of loot comprised of all
prisoners’ belongings while playing a card game. The
bearded devil is obviously bored and frustrated at having
the nearly brain-dead lemure as its only opponent, wishing
it had a real challenge. A clever and persuasive character
may be able to convince the devil into releasing him/her
from the cell to play a game.
Cell Doors. The cell doors feature locks requiring
thieves’ tools and a successful DC 13 Dexterity check to
pick. The doors can also be wrenched open by brute force
with a successful DC 22 Strength check.

Hostage Situation

If adventurers come here to rescue an ally, consider having
the imprisoned character used as a hostage by Terilanyx,
perhaps already restrained on the rack. The devil threatens
to kill the prisoner if the adventurers make a wrong move.
If the bearded devil has no hostages to leverage, it and
the lemure fight to the best of their abilities.

Developments

If a character is imprisoned here, they can either be freed
by other party members, or by coming up with ways to
free themselves.
The spooky southern door leads to the catacombs,
which is an opportunity to continue beyond this adventure
(see “Conclusion”). If they’re adamant about opening the
door and you don’t wish it to lead anywhere, make it a
small storage room with a flameskull (MM p134) instead.

Treasure

The pile of loot that the lemure and bearded devil sat on
has all of the imprisoned character’s equipment along
with the equipment of previous prisoners: amongst
the junk are five javelins, two spears, a shortsword two
longswords, a light crossbow, studded leathers, and
two quivers holding twenty crossbow bolts each. There
is one standout amongst the pile: demonmail hauberk
(APPENDIX A).
Hidden inside the straw pile of an empty cell is a silver
earring set with a tiny ruby (30gp) and a banded gold
ring dotted with emeralds (50gp). Characters searching
the straw pile finds them both with a DC 12 Intelligence
(Investigation) check.
The barrels contain salted pork and beef, flour, sugar,
apples, and ale.

Awarding Experience Points

Divide 1,065 XP equally among the characters if the party
defeats the lemure and bearded devil.

Area A9 - Tower Staircase

A 10-foot wide, spiraling stone staircase starts at the main
hall (A2) and goes up 50 feet to the alchemy lab (A10).
Sconces along the wall hold burning torches, keeping the
staircase brightly lit.
(Warning! Below is a deliciously evil trap that sadistic
DMs will get a kick out of. However, if the characters are
already at low health, it may be best to skip/nerf this trap
as the results may be lethal.)

Slip n’ Slide of Doom
Mechanical trap

check, a character notices some grease seeping through
the outline of each step, and scrapes along the walls.
A successful DC 15 Wisdom (Perception) check spots
a pressure plate or trapdoor if they have vision of it. A
search of the floor accompanied by a successful DC 15
Intelligence (Investigation) check reveals variations in
the mortar and stone that betray the pressure plate’s
presence. The same check while inspecting the ceiling at
the top of the stairs reveals the trapdoor. Wedging an iron
spike or other object under the pressure plates prevents
the trap from activating (or just step over it).
When the trap is activated, all creatures standing on
the stairs must immediately make a DC 13 Dexterity
saving throw as the staircase flips over and turns into a
slippery ramp. On a failed save, the character falls prone
and slides down the ramp, sliding 30 feet per round. A
character that successfully saves may still need to make
additional Dexterity saving throws if creatures above the
character are sliding down into him/her.
After the stairs flip over into a greasy ramp, the sconces
drop the torches, lighting the grease on fire. Characters
standing in the flames take 1d4 fire damage at the start
of each of its turns. Characters that fell prone and are
drenched in grease catch fire, taking 1d6 fire damage of
each of its turns and require a DC 13 Dexterity check to
extinguish the flames.
Finally, once the stairs turn into a flaming greasy ramp,
all affected creatures must roll initiative. The sphere rolls
initiative with a +8 bonus. On its turn, it rolls 50 feet down
the ramp. The sphere can move through creatures’ spaces,
and creatures can move through its space, treating it as
difficult terrain Whenever the sphere enters a creature’s
space or a creature enters its space while it’s rolling, that
creature must succeed on a DC 15 Dexterity saving throw
or take 4d10 bludgeoning damage and an additional 1d6

Of the 60 steps in the staircase, step 30 and
40 are both pressure plates. When 20 or more
pounds of pressure are placed on either of this
trap’s pressure plates, a chain of events happen:
• all the stone steps in the staircase flip
over, transforming into a ramp covered in
slippery grease
• the sconces drop the burning torches,
lighting the grease on fire
• finally, a hidden trapdoor in the ceiling at
the top of the staircase opens, releasing
a 10-foot diameter rolling sphere of solid
stone down the ramp, picking up the
flaming grease as it rolls so it becomes a
fiery boulder of doom
With a successful DC 13 Wisdom (Perception)

Art by Rob Alexander

57

If the trap is triggered, the staircase stays on fire until
doused or naturally dies out after a minute once all the
grease is burned. When the grease is cleared, walking up
the ramp isn’t difficult.
A triggered trap causes a big ruckus, informing Siegfried
of intruders.

Hatching The Egg. A lightning vane (fancy lightning
rod) attached to the platform can be raised up into the
storm, channeling lightning strikes into The Egg. Raising
the lightning vane this way requires an action to turn a
crank. Each round the lightning vane is raised, lightning
strikes it, jolting The Egg. After five lightning strikes, The
Egg hatches into The Thing (APPENDIX B) (PICTURE).
The Thing’s immediate desire is to escape the laboratory.
It only attacks people in its way, including Siegfried. If
reduced to half its hit points, The Thing tears off the roof
and attempts to flee into the wilderness.

Awarding Experience Points

Entering The Laboratory

fire damage and be knocked prone. The sphere stops
when it hits a wall at the bottom of the staircase or similar
barrier.

Developments

Divide 1,800 XP equally among the characters if the party
disarms, purposefully avoids, or triggers the slip n’ slide
of doom.

Area A10 - Alchemy Lab

At the top of the tower is the alchemy lab. Siegfried has
spent the last few months here, working relentlessly day
and night on his experiments. His foul work has attracted
a small following of demons that are interested in seeing
his goals realized. The fiends aid in his work and whisper
dark secrets in his ear, pushing the alchemist towards
greater acts of depravity.
Siegfried is currently at the cusp of completing his
grandest achievement yet: he is about to give life to a new,
immensely powerful being of his own design (The Egg;
see below), which the alchemist hopes will lead his army
of undead against the vampire families.

Galvanizing Life

To wake his new creations, the mad scientist must
bestow upon them “the spark of life,” which requires a
tremendous amount of power.
Siegfried has built a complex device called a galvanizer
-- a machine of sprawling tubes, wires, coils, and lightning
rods that covers his entire lab from floor to rooftop -- to
provide this power. Siegfried uses the galvanizer to create
the raging storm overhead, collecting the electricity from
the lightning strikes to “shock” his creations to life.

The Egg

An open ceiling hatch exposes the laboratory to the
raging storm above. A metal platform is raised up to the
opening, with a huge, slimy purple egg strapped on top of
the platform. The Egg rhythmically expands and contracts
like a beating heart.
Attacking The Egg. The Egg has 60 hit points. If attacked,
it releases a psychic scream of pain, immediately alerting
everyone in the laboratory.

58
Chapter 5: The Perfect Storm

The adventurers are most likely to enter through the
staircase (A9) that connects the lab to the main hall.
Alternatively, they may be entering through the open hatch
in the ceiling, or up the dumbwaiter (A5). Whichever way
they enter, read or paraphrase the following as their first
glance inside:

The misty interior of the laboratory glows with a flickering
radiance and hums with power. Metal rods and spheres
jutting from the floors and ceilings are awash in electricity.
A jungle of glass tubes and metal wires sprawl all over
the floor, walls, and ceiling, connecting the strange
contraptions found here with everything else.
An open ceiling hatch exposes the laboratory to the
raging storm above. A metal platform is raised up to the
opening, with a huge, slimy purple egg strapped on top
of it.
The most notable features of the room to spot are:
• Large glass incubators containing bulky malformed
humanoids floating inside luminous greenish-blue
liquids; these are schmelzmen (APPENDIX B)
• A metal platform with a humanoid figure lying down
on it, hidden under a bloodstained sheet; this is a
flesh golem (MM p169)
• A second metal platform adorned with lightning rods,
raised up to the ceiling hatch and exposed to the
thunderstorm above; it holds The Egg
Siegfried is too engrossed in his work to be bothered
keeping an eye on the rest of the estate. If the adventurers
managed to reach the laboratory without triggering the
trap in the staircase (A9), no one warned Siegfried of
intruders (A5), and The Egg doesn’t scream, use the
Caught Unaware scenario below. If Siegfried is warned of
the party’s presence, use the Ready for Action scenario
instead.

Caught Unaware

Art by Jason Felix

Siegfried (APPENDIX B) paces through the laboratory,
making sure everything is running smoothly and he barking
orders to his homunculus assistant, Oglor (APPENDIX B).
Qarr, a quasit (MM 63), observes invisibly from a corner.
The fiend is alert for trouble and actively scans the area
(Passive Perception 15); ironically, Qarr is rather skittish
around creations that have a habit of randomly springing
to life and causing the poor quasit a bit of a scare.

•

•

mage armor already cast on himself.
Flipping Switches. Once combat
begins, Siegfried’s primary goal is to
distract the adventurers long enough
for The Egg to hatch. He runs across
the lab to flip two switches: the first
animates the schmelzmen and the
second animates the flesh golem.
He can flip one switch as per turn
as a free action. He prefers to start
combat by casting invisibility, since
flipping switches does not break the
spell.
Here is a general sequence of
actions that Siegfried will take during
combat, along with sample dramatic
banter the mad scientist likes to
engage in. Siegfried in this crazed
state is based heavily off Victor
Frankenstein in popular culture.
The mad scientist also engages in
dramatic banter:
1st Round: Siegfried casts invisibility on himself and
taunts the adventurers. He flips a switch, sending
a pulse of electricity that shatters the incubators,
animating three schmelzmen (APPENDIX B) that
immediately attack the party
“So the Voldarens have managed to breach my
sanctum. You’ve come just in time, bloodsuckers:
witness the fruits of my labor!”
2nd Round: Siegfried flips the second switch, sending
a massive pulse of electricity that animates the narstad
scrapper (APPENDIX B), which immediately attacks
the party. Siegfried also instructs Oglor to raise the
lightning vane.
“Behold! I create life with the flip of a switch! I am a
GOD!”
“The storm has reached peak potency! Oglor, raise the
lightning vane!”

A man in a long white coat strides excitedly through the
laboratory, flipping switches and turning knobs with his
thick rubber gloves, pausing only for a moment to watch
their effects. He barks orders across the room at small
green-skinned humanoid, who’s “head” is a giant eyeball
encased in a bronze helmet with a large telescope lens
to peer out of. “The storm is ready to harness! Oglor,
increase the rotational speed of the flux capacitor to eighty
percent!”

•

The adventurers have a surprise round if none of the lab’s
occupants notice them.

Siegfried only engages the adventurers directly if they
attack The Egg or are clearly gaining the upper hand in the
battle. Siegfried fearlessly defends his life’s work, casting
his most powerful spells to fight off the adventurers and
fighting to the death if he must.
“NO! I have worked too hard to see my dreams ruined
by the likes of you! I will have my revenge!”
Oglor raises the lightning vane when commanded to by
turning a crank (see “The Egg”). Oglor avoids combat as
long as no one interferes with its task.
Qarr is not a fighter and is content to observe while
invisible.

Ready For Action

If alerted to the adventurer’s presence ahead of time, then
Siegfried, Qarr, and Oglor are on alert for intruders, each
of them gaining +5 to their Passive Perception to catch
anyone trying to sneak in.

Combat!

Siegfried is convinced that the adventurers are either
vampires or servants of them. It would take a tremendous
effort to talk him out of a fight. He starts the fight with

•
•

59
Chapter 5: The Perfect Storm

Developments

This battle is quite dangerous. In the event that the party
is defeated, Siegfried imprisons the surviving characters
in the cellar (A8) for future interrogation and experiments.
If defeated and taken captive, Siegfried’s madness
cannot be fixed in an instant (though a wish spell or
similar powerful magic might). Bringing him back to
sanity is certainly possible, but the healing process takes
time and effort. The best immediate effect an adventurer
can hope for is to at least calm him down.
Oglor is loyal to Siegfried, its master. However, if
Siegfried is slain, it views his killer as its new master.
Oglor can’t speak, but it tries to convey its wish to serve
through gestures.
Qarr, while seemingly working under Siegfried as well,
actually serves a more powerful archdemon; who that
mysterious patron is up to you. The quasit was tasked
to corrupt Siegfried by this patron. At your discretion,
Qarr may offer to serve as a familiar to one of the party
members, tempting the character with power/info/wealth
as appropriate, with a hidden agenda to keep tabs on the
party’s movements. Or the quasit may try to escape and
inform the mysterious patron on the adventurers’ actions
– up to you!
Should the tubes, wires, coils, and other machinery
that the galvanizer consists of be significantly damaged
from area of effect spells or direct attacks (your
discretion), or if the adventurers manage to switch it off,
then the thunderstorm disperses and the radiant wards
surrounding the tower fade away.
If you wish to use the NPC Sir Delandel, the Undead
Paladin, characters can find him trapped inside a steel
incubator. Siegfried found Delandel in Mauer Estate and
hooked him up to the galvanizer; he is unwilling the source
for the protective radiant wards that surround the tower.

Treasure

Siegfried wears the electric recombobulator (APPENDIX A)
and has one scroll of each of the following: alarm, catapult,
false life, mage armor, mirror image, and lightning bolt. In
addition, Siegfried carries the broken missing piece of the
Strionic Resonator and a key to a chest.
A chest is tucked underneath Siegfried’s work desk.
The chest’s padlock can be picked using thieves’ tools
with a successeful DC 20 Dexterity check. However, the
lock is rigged with a poison needle trap that triggers if
a character isn’t pressing down a concealed button on
the side of the chest while opening the chest. The needle
and button can both be found with a successful DC 20
Intelligence (Investigation) check and can be disarmed
with a successful DC 15 Dexterity check. A creature
triggering the needle trap is injected with wyvern poison

60
Chapter 5: The Perfect Storm

and must make a DC 13 Constitution saving throw, taking
5d6 poison damage on a failed save, or half as much on a
successful one.
The chest contains a silver locket with a picture of a
young woman inside (Katarina), a silver torc with soaring
herons (80 gp), six moonstones of 50 gp each, 200 sp, 90
gp, and 10 pp.
A thorough search of the room yields several letters
to Siegfried from Geralf, a cousin and infamous stitcher
currently operating in the Moorland. Geralf’s letters
reveals an exchange on necro-alchemy information
between the two. In the last dated letter, Geralf praises
his cousin’s brilliance, stating that he put into practice
Siegfried’s blueprints for a modern “goliath skaab” and it
turned out “better than I could ever have hoped.” Geralf
has named this creation Grimgrin, and invites Siegfried
to join him and his sister in Gavony, where they plan to
march on Thraben itself soon. If the characters deliver
these letters to the proper authorities in Gavony, award
the party 4,000 XP.
The laboratory is littered with specialized alchemical
tools and devices, glass jars full of pickled organs,
anatomical charts for both human and beast, runeengraved skeletal remains, dozens of tools for inscribing
runes on brass and copper plates, and on. In total, the
laboratory would be worth 80,000 gp to necro-alchemists
in Nephalia, but moving this equipment is highly
impracticle and dismantling it by someone not trained in
alchemy can easily destroy the fragile equipment.

Awarding Experience Points

Divide 1,800 XP equally among the characters if the party
defeats Siegfried and his minions. Award an additional
500 XP if the characters find the missing piece of the
Strionic Resonator.

Milestone: Level 5!

If you are using Milestone Experience, then the characters
attain 5th level as you conclude this adventure!

Conclusion

With hard work and a little luck, the adventurers have
defeated Siegfried and undone his destructive plots.
All in Stensia will take note of their deeds: the humans
of Stensia shall be grateful for years to come, and the
vampire families will surely take note of these new heroes
as well.
By the end of the adventure, the characters should be
5th level. If your players wish to continue playing their
characters, you can use the contents of this setting to

create your own adventures. Innistrad is a world teeming
with possibility. Below are some potential hooks to spur
your imagination:

Stensia
•

•

•

explore the hidden catacombs under Mauer Estate,
where an ancient order of Paladins used to hide away
from the world powerful relics of evil that could not
be destroyed
the vampire families have taken notice of the
adventurer’s deeds; perhaps they “reward” them for
taking care of Siegfried, or perhaps they feel threatened
by their power
adventurers may find out the fate of Katarina: perhaps
she wasn’t killed, but rather turned into a vampire. Or
perhaps she managed to escape the vampires.

•

Kessig
•

•

•

Gavony
•
•

Geralf and Gisa are planning to march against
Thraben. The Church of Avacyn brushes this news
aside, explaining they have more pressing matters.
The heart of the Skirsdag cult’s operations is revealed:
Thraben, the seat of the Church itself. Many high

priests are in fact cultists in disguise.
The siege of Thraben happens in earnest, and the
adventurers play a crucial role in its defense alongside
Thalia.

•

the people of Kessig have always had a rough
relationship with the Church, resenting the Church’s
disconnect with the realities of this wild place and
balking at the “Curfew of Silver.” With Avacyn gone,
Kessigers are in the midst of a crisis of faith.
Ferocious howlpacks run wild over Kessig, forcing
countless humans to take up residence in walled
settlements protected by too few angels and cathars.
Sigarda, leader of the Flight of Herons, is in desperate
need of heroes to deal with the howlpack alphas.
With Avacyn’s protective spells failing, the druids of
Kessig have went back to old, ancient magic of the
forest. While they are getting results, rumors abound
that sinister sources are behind some of the seemingly
“benevolent” nature magic.
Katarina’s uncle, Hanns Reinhart, is one of Innistrad’s
most venerated astronomers. She had hoped Hanns

61

would know the secret to using the Strionic Resonator,
but he has apparrently disappeared from his home in
Kessig after a werewolf attack.

Nephalia
•
•

•

•
•

The adventurers need to locate an important item
which is said to be found in Nephalia’s seedy
underground passages known as The Erdwal
The Stormkirk vampires are willing to provide a
service to the adventurers if they deal with a situation
for them: kill the vampire sorceress Jeleva, Nephalia’s
Scourge.
Siegfried’s alchemical notes repeatedly mention the
Strionic Resonator. The only person that can decipher
their meanings is the reclusive alchemist in Nephalia;
Ludevic of Ulm.
The Fauchard, an order of human vampire hunters,
requests the adventurer’s aid for their most dangerous
hunt yet.
Jenrik, irrefutably the most knowledgable astronomer
in all of Innistrad, spends his days studying the moon
in his glittering tower on the Silver Beach. If anyone
can figure out the Strionic Resonator’s secrets, it’s
him.

Planeswalkers
•

•

•

Sorin Markov seeks the aid of the adventurers in
finding Avacyn. The Dark Prince of Innistrad has
long ago been banished from Markov Manor, and his
vampirism makes it difficult to journey into human
settlements. He may ask the adventurers to pay a visit
his old ancestral home or follow leads in a human
district.
Liliana Vess has left a path of destruction in her search
for the demon Griselbrand. She may strike a deal with
the adventurers to help uncover Skirsdag cultists to
interrogate about the demon’s whereabouts.
Tamiyo studies Innistrad’s silver moon in Nephalia.
She may ask the adventurers for assistance locating
old tomes about the moon, or aid in her dangerous
experiments.

62
APPENDIX A: Special Items

APPENDIX A: Special
Items
Special Properties

The following are materials that have special properties in
the world of Innistrad.

Blessed Silver

Pure silver that has been ritually blessed by a powerful
cleric of Avacyn is called blessed silver. According to
alchemists, silver’s purity of material readily absorbs
divine magic. Blessed silver is used as protective warding
against evil creatures, weaving it into clothing or engraving
the material into door frames to keep spirits out.
Arrowheads, spearpoints, and other weapons made
from blessed silver can be powerful instruments for
fighting evil creatures, especially werewolves. Smiths
capable of forging such weapons are called silversmiths,
usually clergy that are trained in the art of weaponmaking, or a weaponsmith working alongside clergy.
Certain blessings must be said at certain times during the
forging process to properly imbue the silver weapon with
divine magic. Because of the difficulty of imbuing silver
with strong magic, and its usefulness against the growing
threat of werewolves, silversmiths are particularly revered
in their communities.
A weapon made of blessed silver has a +1 bonus to
attack rolls against lycanthropes, fiends, and undead.
A lycanthrope struck by this weapon takes an extra 1d6
radiant damage.

Living Wood

Although vampires can be harmed or killed by any
weapon, living wood have special efficacy. This is dubbed
the Dryad’s Legacy (dead wood is inert, no more effective
than stone or steel.) Newly cut wood has this property for

only a day or two before becoming inert.
Human settlements that are close to vampires make
sure to have close access to living wood in an attempt to
fend off attacks. This is especially true in province Stensia,
where many powerful vampire families live. In small
villages, the cottages are usually around a small grove
of hawthorn trees for centralized access to living wood.
In larger villages, the cottages themselves are often built
around a hawthorn, with the tree’s trunk in the center of
the common room and its leaves above the roof.
A weapon made of living wood deals an extra 1d6
damage to vampires. If a piercing weapon made of living
wood is driven into the vampire’s heart, the vampire is
destroyed.

Magic Items

Loot Cards. All the new magic items in this adventure also
come with card handout versions that you can download
here. They fit perfectly in a Magic card sleeve on top of
a random Magic card. Cursed items have an additional
innocent-looking version you can use until the curse is
fully revealed; for example, when the party acquires Elbrus,
the Binding Blade, you can give them Shapshifter’s Blade
until they discover the true nature of the weapon.
Cursed Items. Some of the magic items described here
are cursed. Most methods of identifying items, including
the identify spell, fail to reveal such a curse, although lore
might hint at it. A curse should be a surprise to the item’s
user when the curse’s effects are revealed. Cursed items
come with two loot cards: a hidden version that doesn’t
reveal the curse, and then the revealed version that shows
what the curse does. It’s recommended you only show
the receiver of the item the hidden version until they learn
exactly what the curse does, then give them the cursed
version.
Attunement to a cursed item can’t be ended voluntarily
unless the curse is broken first, such as with the remove
curse spell.

Avacyn’s Collar

LOOT CARD
Wondrous item, common
Hanging from this necklace of blessed silver is a large
symbol of Avacyn. The collar can feel immensely heavy
or light as a feather, depending on the wearer’s feelings
towards Avacyn.
Wearing this chain grants a bonus +2 DC to any Channel
Divinity class ability the wearer uses that requires a
savings throw.

63
Art by Jason Felix
Art by Eric Deschamps

APPENDIX A: Special Items

Butcher’s Cleaver

LOOT CARD
Weapon (handaxe), rare (requires attunement)
You gain a +1 bonus to attack and damage rolls made
with this magic weapon. The butcher’s cleaver has jagged
notches and scrapes all along its blade from heavy use.
When it hasn’t spilt blood for over a day, the cleaver
begins to rapidly deteriorate, its blade becoming dull and
lined with rust.
When you deal damage to a creature that has blood
with this magic weapon, the cleaver sucks up some of
the blood it spills, returning to pristine condition and you
regain 1 hit point.

Demonmail Hauberk

LOOT CARDS: HIDDEN, REVEALED
Armor (chain mail), rare (requires attunement)
You have a +2 bonus to AC while wearing this armor.
The metal rings composing this hauberk glimmer as if
reflecting torchlight and smells faintly of brimstone.
When worn, it fits perfectly on the wearer; like a second
skin.The metal rings do not jingle when you move around,
so you don’t take the usual disadvantage to Dexterity
(Stealth) checks.
Curse. The Demonmail Hauberk is cursed, a fact that is
revealed only when you attune to it. Attuning to the armor
curses you: the hauberk merges with your skin, making
it impossible to doff without ripping your skin off. The
curse can be dispelled if you are targeted by the remove
curse spell or similar magic, or by physically removing the
armor from your body.
Physically removing the armor is a horribly excruciating
process. You must deal 10d10 total slashing damage
to yourself as you rip the hauberk off your body, tearing
your skin off with it. You can take your time removing the
armor, dealing a minimum 1d10 damage a time, until
you deal the total 10d10 damage to remove the hauberk
completely.

crossbow.
Devour Soul. Whenever you use it to reduce a creature to
0 hit points, Elbrus slays the creature and devours its soul
if it has one. A creature whose soul has been devoured by
Elbrus can be restored to life only by a Wish spell. When
it devours a soul, Elbrus grants you temporary hit points
equal to twice your character level.
Keep track of how many souls are devoured by Elbrus.
For every 6 creatures slain this way, the weapon gains an
additional +1 bonus to attack and damage rolls.
Curse. This dagger is cursed, holding the trapped
essence of the demon lord Withengar. Becoming attuned
to it extends the curse to you. As long as you remain
cursed, any time you attack with weapons other than this
one, you must succeed on a DC 15 Wisdom saving throw.
On a failed save, the weapon is unknowingly swapped
out with this one, taking the same form of the previous
weapon.
Once eighteen creatures have been slain with the
Devour Soul ability, the weapon shatters, and Withengar
is unleashed. He is a balor (MM 55). How Withengar acts
after being released from his centuries-long imprisonment
is up to you.
Unlike most curses, the trapped essence of Withengar
cannot be destroyed by a remove curse spell. At the
DM’s discretion, the spell may be sufficient to break the
wielder’s attunement to the dagger, but far more powerful
magic must be employed to destroy the demon lord.

(GM’s discretion on what creatures count as having a
soul. Most playthroughs counted all humans, spirits, and
vampires as having souls, while zombies and skeletons
do not. Feel free to change how many souls are needed
to release the campaign-altering demon: 18 means it’s
unlikely to be released during this adventure, so if you
want to see it released earlier you can lower it to 13, 7, or
whatever else)

Elbrus, the Binding Blade

LOOT CARDS: HIDDEN, REVEALED
Weapon (dagger), legendary (requires attunement)
You gain a +1 bonus to attack and damage rolls made with
this magic weapon.
Change Form. While attuned to this weapon, you can
use a bonus action to change this weapon’s form into any
other ranged or melee weapon. For example, you can use
a bonus action to turn this weapon into a +1 longsword,
and then a subsequent bonus action to turn it into a +1

Art by Eric Deschamps

64
APPENDIX A: Special Items

Art by James Paick

Electric Recombobulator

LOOT CARD
Wondrous item, rare (requires attunement)
The electric recombobulator is composed of a
geist-tank that is connected via alternator tubes
to a power gauntlet. The geist tank is typically
harnessed to your back, the power gauntlet worn on
one hand. The recombobulator has the power to launch
the very particles constructing your body through an
electric current and reconstruct them magnetically once it
reaches it’s destination.
Lightning Leap. While wearing the recombobulator,
you can use an action to transform yourself into a line
of lightning, similar to that created by the lightning bolt
spell. This line can be of any length from 10 feet to 60
feet. Your body instantly reconstructs at the nearest
unoccupied space at the opposite end of the line, along
with any gear worn or carried (up to a maximum of your
heavy load limit). Each creature in the line must make a
Dexterity saving throw. A creature takes 6d6 lightning
damage on a failed save, or half as much damage on a
successful one. The recombobulator can’t be used this
way again until the next dawn.

Ghoulcaller’s Bell

LOOT CARD
Wondrous item, uncommon
This bell is crafted from the upper half of an imp’s skull
and molded with iron. The word “grave” is engraved on
the skull in Infernal. Its chime is inaudible to the living,
but the dead hear it loud and clear.
You can speak the word “grave” in Infernal while holding
the ghoulcaller’s bell to conjure a fresh human corpse.
The bell can’t be used this way again until the next dawn.
Ringing the bell allows you to cast Command as a 2nd
level spell, except it only can affect undead. The bell can’t
be used this away again until the next dawn.

Message Bottle

Wondrous item, uncommon
When you speak a message into this bottle, the words
take on the tangible form of a silvery mist that swirls
inside it that can be immediately sealed. Once the bottle
is unsealed, the silvery mist escapes and the message is
repeated to whomever holds the bottle, then fades away.

Moonsilver Spear

LOOT CARD
Weapon (spear), rare (requires attunement)
You gain a +1 bonus to attack and damage rolls made with
this magic weapon made of blessed silver.
Angelic Summons. You can use an action to speak this
spear’s command word, summoning a guardian angel to
smite a foe within 60 feet of you that you can see. The
target must make a DC 15 Dexterity saving throw. The
target takes 4d6 radiant damage on a failed save, or half as
much damage on a successful save. The angel disappears
after delivering its strike. This property can’t be used again
until the next dawn.

Vial of Life’s Blood
Potion, uncommon

You regain 6d4+6 hit points when drinking this potion.
In addition, whenever a vampire bites you or otherwise
drinks your blood, it takes 2d10 acid damage. This effect
lasts for an hour.

Violin of Banishing Light
LOOT CARD
Wondrous item, uncommon

This violin is an exquisite example of its kind, perfect in
every way. The wood is thinly lined with blessed silver.
While holding the violin, you can use your action to
play it and cast the Daylight spell with it. To maintain
Concentration on the spell, you must additionally make
a DC 10 Charisma (Performance) check each round. The
violin can’t be used this way again until the next dawn.

65
APPENDIX A: Special Items

APPENDIX B: Monsters
The following is a list of all the monsters/NPCs the
characters may encounter in the adventure, divided by
chapters. The monster’s statistics are found either in the
Monster Manual (page number), otherwise it’s included
here in this APPENDIX:
CHAPTER 1:
skeleton (272)
swarm of skeletal bats
demonlord of ashmouth
hellrider
ashmouth hound
smoke mephit (217)
shadow (269)
giant spider (328)
giant wolf spider (330)
commoner (345)
werewolf (206)
CHAPTER 2:
guard (347)
thug (350)
cult fanatic (345)
mage (347)
priestess (348)
twig blight (32)
vine blight (32)
poltergeist (279)
CHAPTER 3:
zombie (316)
skeleton (272)
skaab goliath
cult fanatic (345)
guard (347)
priest (348)
specter (279)
thug (350)
CHAPTER 4:
hellhound (182)
will-o’-wisp (301)
grell (172)
shambling mound (270)
commoner (345)
fire geist
vampire spawn warrior

66
APPENDIX B: Monsters

CHAPTER 5:
dryad (121)
zombie (316)
gargoyle (140)
mimic (220)
animated armor (19)
flying sword (20)
vampire spawn (298)
demonlord of ashmouth
crawling claw (44)
charmbreaker devil
bearded devil (70)
lemure (76)
flameskull (134)
schmelzmen
flesh golem (169)
Siegfried
Oglor
quasit (63)
the thing

PICTURE
Devils and skirsdag cultists create ashmouth hounds by
ritually binding fire elementals native to the ashmouth
chasm with unwilling canine hosts. The unholy union
of elemental and beast causes unending agony to the
merged entity as its flames constantly sears its own flesh.
The twisted creature’s sole purpose is to inflict pain and
destruction on others, which is the only fleeting distraction
from the agony it endures.

PICTURE
Though they do not need to eat or drink to survive,
charmbreaker devils delight in consuming magic, be it
a magic spell, item, or even practitioner. They can smell
magical auras and can track their scent within a mile
radius. Once the source of the magic is discovered, they
will tear it to shreds and gleefully slurp up the magical
essence. The more potent the magic source, the greater
the feast for the devils.

67

A fire geist is the anguished spirit of an individual that
died a gruesome death by fire. When they cannot find
peace in the Blessed Sleep, or their sleep is disturbed,
they manifest in the material world take take out their pain
and hate on anyone that dares disturb them.
PICTURE
In the strict demon hiearchy, demonlords are near the top,
controlling specific regions in Innistrad and commanding
lesser devils, demons, and cultists to do their bidding. They
work directly under archdemons, coveting their masters’
power and planning for the day they can overthrow them.
Shilgengar is the demonlord of the ashmouth region in
Stensia. He is famous for creating great famines in the
lands, to the point that his horse skull head became a
symbol for famine to the people of Innistrad.

68

PICTURE
While some fiends prefer malicious pranks and taunting
innocents, hellriders revel in bloodshed and destruction.
They often serve as shock troops to more powerful fiends,
leading the charge into battle atop their ashmouth hound
mounts.

PICTURE
A stitcher’s apprentice is a special type of homunculus
designed to assist skabaren, or “stitchers,” in laboratory
work. Their giant eyeball “heads” and dextrous hands are
perfectly suited for tiny, precise detail work. A master can
have only one stitched apprentice at a time, but unlike
regular homonculi, a stitcher apprentice does not die
when its master dies.
Shared Mind. A stitcher apprentice knows everything
its creator knows, including all the languages the creator
can speak and read. Likewise, everything the construct
senses is known to its master, even over great distances,
provided both are on the same plan.

69

PICTURE
Rinelda was only six years old when her village was
overrun by the undead. Her innate talents at commanding
the undead kept her alive, but weren’t enough to stop the
ravenous ghouls from tearing apart her parents right in
front of her eyes. Since then, Rinelda has prided herself as
a survivor, wandering the province of Stensia and taking
what she wants with her entourage of undead minions.
Recently, the teen necromancer has begun studying
under Siegfried, eagerly doing the mad man’s bidding and
learning as much as she can before she eventually moves
to usurp his operations in Mauer Estate.

A schmelzman, or “melting man,” is a type of undead
created by stitchers. While skaabs are the product of
month’s work of careful preparation, building, and
conditioning, schmelzmen are considered rushed
products. They are made by melting down the flesh
of humanoids in stinking vats filled with acid and foul
ingredients, and then animating it with electricity.
A melting man looks vaguely humanoid; its acidic flesh
constantly sloughs off its body only to be immediately
replaced by its regenerative tissues. The spark that give
schemlzmen life is highly unstable and they’re prone to
explode if damaged, which stitchers generally consider to
be a “happy accident.”

70
APPENDIX B: Monsters

PICTURE
Skaabs are Innistrad’s version of Frankenstein’s Monster.
They are alchemically vivified constructions of flesh,
made from various anatomical parts of corpses, stitched
together and bound with binding plates, and filled with
vital fluid. Compared to zombies risen by ghoulcallers,
skaabs require far more work to create but result in
stronger, calmer, and more trainable creatures.
Skaabs Goliaths are the largest category of skaabs, made
from the body parts of at least a dozen corpses. They are
the ultimate zombie for physical labor, from carrying huge
supplies to knocking down reinforced gates.

Scholars have long speculated why bats in Stensia are
prone to animate as skeletons, gathering themselves
together into vicious swarms with an insatiable hunger for
the living. It could be that the bats are naturally prone to
the evil necromantic energy that infuses the land -- though
they’re just as likely to be the product of vampires, created
to control specific roads or simply for amusement.

71
APPENDIX B: Monsters

PICTURE
The culmination of Siegfried’s last explorations in alchemy,
this abomination combines the choice traits of a variety of
creatures. The end result is a huge, reptilian beast with
the strength of a dozen men and an even more voracious
appetite.
PICTURE
Once an alchemist living in Shadowgrange, Siegfried
dedicated his life to protecting his people from the
supernatural horrors of Innistrad. When his fiancee,
Katarina Brunn, was kidnapped by the Voldarens, Siegfried
left his home, vowing revenge on the vampires that stole
his beloved and his countrymen that stood idly by while it
happened.
Combat Tactics. Siegfried uses invisibility to get around
a battlefield without being disturbed. When pressed into
combat, he casts mirror image, then lets loose lightning
bolts and chromatic orbs. Siegfried uses his reaction to
either cast shield (if hit) or counterspell (if a nasty spell
is directed at him). Finally, lightning leap and misty step
allow him to escape melee range if an adventurer is up in
his face.

72
APPENDIX B: Monsters

PICTURE
Innistrad vampires do not sleep in a coffin, nor are they
severely hampered by sunlight. The origins of their creation
gave them other flaws, however, such as a vulnerability to
living wood and a fear of their own horrible reflections.
For more information on Innistrad’s unique twist on
vampires and the vampires families that rule Stensia,
check out the Planeswalker’s Guide to Stensia.

73

APPENDIX C: Handouts
You can download high quality versions of all the props and
handouts from this adventure here. These are meant to be
shown to the players, so it would be best to print these
out seperately and handed to them when the adventure
prompts you to. Here is the list of handouts in the order
that they appear in the APPENDIX; where they are found
in the adventure, and high-quality download links:
• Geralf’s coded letter: found in the alchemist’s
basement (p22)
• Katarina’s music puzzle: found in the music room
(p23)
• All the new magic items in card form
• All the maps made for this adventure

Credits

This adventure was created by me, Tomer Abramovici,
also known on Reddit as /u/SpiketailDrake or on Twitter
@BudgetCommander . I had a lot of help along the way,
and exceptionally talented folks contributed to this final
product:
• Player’s Guide to Innistrad: Human Variants, along
with all the maps included in this adventure, were
created by redditor /u/Nihilates
• Geralf’s coded letter found in the basement of the
alchemy shop in Chapter 2 was created by redditor
/u/RanAngel
Thank you to Wizards of the Coast for both D&D and the
Innistrad setting, without both I wouldn’t be able to write
this adventure. Special shoutout to Wizards’ creative team
including Doug Beyer. I loved the Savor the Flavor series
and Uncharted Realms!
Big thanks to both the Reddit and GiTP communities for
their input and support., along with the folks on Google
who helped me tweak the final product.
And, of course, thank you to my playgroup for letting me
test all my evil traps on :-)

74
APPENDIX C: Handouts

